The '''aardwolf''' (''Proteles cristata'') is a small, insectivorous mammal, native to East and Southern Africa. Its name means "earth wolf" in Afrikaans and Dutch.EBIt is also called "maanhaar jackal"2013 (Afrikaans for "mane jackal") or ''civet hyena'', based on the secretions from their anal glands, reminiscent of civets.ingoThe aardwolf is in the same family as the hyenas. Unlike many of its relatives in the order Carnivora, the aardwolf does not hunt large animals. It eats insects, mainly termites – one aardwolf can eat about 250,000 termites during a single night, using its long, sticky tongue to capture them.mh71The aardwolf lives in the scrublands of eastern and southern Africa – open lands covered with stunted trees and shrubs. It is nocturnal, resting in burrows during the day and emerging at night to seek food. Its diet consists mainly of termites and insect larvae.TaxonomyThe aardwolf is the only surviving species in the mammalian subfamily ''Protelinae''. There is disagreement as to whether the species is monotypic. or can be divided into subspecies ''P. c. cristatus'' of Southern Africa and ''P. c. septentrionalis'' of East Africa.ingomh33Recent studies have shown that the aardwolf probably broke away from the rest of the hyena family early on; however, how early is still unclear as the fossil record and genetic studies disagree by 10 million years.The aardwolf is generally classified with the Hyaenidae, though it was formerly placed into the family ''Protelidae''. Early on, scientists felt that it was merely mimicking the striped hyena, which subsequently led to the creation of Protelidae.EtymologyThe genus name ''proteles'' comes from two words both of Greek origin, ''protos'' and ''teleos'' which combined means "complete in front" based on the fact that they have five toes on their front feet and four on the rear.ingoThe species name, ''cristatus'' comes from Latin and means "provided with a comb", relating to their mane.ingoPhysical characteristicsImage:Aardwolf02.jpg|thumb|left|Detail of head – taken at the Cincinnati Zoo. Note the ability to rotate the ears.The aardwolf resembles a very thin striped hyena, but with a more slender muzzle, black vertical stripes on a coat of yellowish fur, and a long, distinct mane down the midline of the neck and back. It also has one or two diagonal stripes down the fore and hindquarters, along with several stripes on its legs. The mane is raised during confrontations in order to make the aardwolf appear larger. It is missing the throat spot that others in the family have.ingoIts lower leg (from the knee down) is all black, and its tail is bushy with a black tip.w1The aardwolf is about in long, excluding its bushy tail, which is about in long,w1and stands about in tall at the shoulders. An adult aardwolf weighs approximately , sometimes reaching lb. The aardwolves in the south of the continent tend to be smaller (about lb), whereas the eastern version weighs more (around lb).mh33The front feet have five toes each, unlike the four-toed hyena.EBThe teeth and skull are similar to those of other hyenas, though smaller,Colliersand its cheek teeth are specialised for eating insects.EBIt does still have canines; however, unlike other hyenas, these teeth are used primarily for fighting and defense.w1Its ears, which are large,w1are very similar to those of the striped hyena.ingoAs an aardwolf ages, it will normally lose some of its teeth, though this has little impact on its feeding habits due to the softness of the insects that it eats."wff"The aardwolf has two anal glands that secrete a musky fluid for marking territory and for communicating with other aardwolves.Image:Aardwolf Skull.JPG|thumb|left|Aardwolf skullDistribution and habitatAardwolves live in open, dry plains and bushland, avoiding mountainous areas.w1Due to their specific food requirements, they are only found in regions where termites of the family Hodotermitidae occur. Termites of this family depend on dead and withered grass and are most populous in heavily grazed grasslands and savannahs, including farmland. For most of the year, aardwolves spend time in shared territories consisting of up to a dozen dens, which are occupied for six weeks at a time."wff"There are two distinct populations: one in Southern Africa, and another in East and Northeast Africa. The species does not occur in the intermediary miombo forests.An adult pair, along with their most recent offspring, will occupy a territory of sqmi.BehaviorAardwolf at the San Antonio ZooAardwolves are shy and nocturnal, sleeping in underground burrows by day.EBThey will, on occasion during the winter, become diurnal feeders. This happens during the coldest periods as they then stay in at night to conserve heat.They have often been mistaken for solitary animals. In fact, they live as monogamous pairs with their young. If their territory is infringed upon, they will chase the intruder up to ft or to the border.mh108If the intruder is caught, which rarely happens,mh108a fight will occur, which is accompanied by soft clucking,br31hoarse barking, and a type of roar.PKRThe majority of incursions occur during mating season, when they can occur 1–2 times per week.PKRWhen food is scarce the stringent territorial system may be abandoned and as many as three pairs may occupy a "single territory."PKRThe territory is marked by both sexes, as they both have developed anal glands from which they extrude a black substance that is smeared on rocks or grass stalks in  long streaks.PKRThey often mark near termite mounds within their territory every 20 minutes or so. If they are patrolling their territorial boundaries, the marking frequency increases drastically, to once every ft. At this rate, an individual may mark 60 marks per hour,PKRand upwards of 200 per night.mh108An aardwolf pair may have up to ten dens, and numerous middens, within their territory. When they deposit feces at their middens, they dig a small hole and then cover it with sand. Their dens are usually abandoned aardvark, springhare, or porcupine dens, or on occasion they are crevices in rocks. They will also dig their own dens, or enlarge dens started by springhares.PKRThey typically will only use one or two dens at a time, rotating through all of their dens every six months. During the summer, they may rest outside their den during the night, and sleep underground during the heat of the day.Aardwolfs are not fast runners nor are they particularly adept at fighting off predators. Therefore, when threatened, the aardwolf will attempt to mislead its foe by doubling back on its tracks. If confronted, it will raise its mane in an attempt to appear more menacing. It will also emit a foul-smelling liquid from its anal glands.ColliersFeedingThe aardwolf feeds primarily on termites and more specifically on ''Trinervitermes''. This genus of termites has different species throughout the aardwolfs range. In East Africa, they eat ''Trinervitermes bettonianus'', and in central Africa they eat ''Trinervitermes rhodesiensis'', and finally in southern Africa, they eat ''Trinervitermes trinervoides''.EBmh71Their technique consists of licking them off the ground as opposed to the aardvark which will dig into the mound.br30They locate their food by sound and also from the scent secreted by the soldier termites.PKRAn aardwolf may consume up to 250,000 termites per night using its sticky, long tongue.mh71"wff"They do not destroy the termite mound or consume the entire colony, thus ensuring that the termites can rebuild and provide a continuous supply of food. They will often memorize the location of such nests and return to them every few months.br31During certain seasonal events, such as the onset of the rainy season and the cold of mid-winter, the primary termites become scarce and so the need for other forms of sustenance becomes pronounced. During these times, the southern aardwolf will seek out ''Hodotermes mossambicus'', a type of harvester termite,PKRa termite active in the afternoon, which explains some of their diurnal behavior in the winter.mh71The eastern aardwolf will, during the rainy season, get variety by subsisting on termites from the genera ''Odontotermes'' and ''Macrotermes''.mh71They are also known to feed on other insects, larvae, eggs and, some sources say, occasionally small mammals and birds, but these constitute a very small percentage of their total diet.PKRUnlike other hyenas, aardwolves do not scavenge or kill larger animals.w1br31Contrary to popular myths, aardwolfs do not eat carrion, and if they are seen eating while hunched over a dead carcass, it is actually eating larvae and beetles.w1Also, contrary to some sources, they do not like meat, unless it is finely ground or cooked for them.w1The adult aardwolf was formerly assumed to forage in small groups,Colliershowever, more recent research has shown that they are primarily solitary foragers,koelnecessary because of the scarcity of their insect prey. Their primary source, ''Trinervitermes'', forages in small but dense patches of in.PKRWhile foraging, the aardwolf will cover about mi per hour, which translates to mi per summer night and mi per winter night.w1BreedingThe breeding season varies depending on their location, but normally takes place during autumn or spring. In South Africa, breeding occurs in early July.mh108During the breeding season, unpaired male aardwolves will search their own territory, as well as others, for a female to mate with. Dominant males will also mate opportunistically with the females of less dominant neighboring aardwolves,mh108which can result in conflict between rival males.ingoDominant males will even go a step further and as the breeding season approaches, they will make increasingly greater and greater incursions onto weaker males' territories. As the female comes into oestrus, they will add pasting to their tricks inside of the other territories, sometimes doing so more in rivals' territories than their own.mh108Females will also, when given the opportunity, mate with the dominant male, which will increase the chances of the dominat male guarding "his" cubs with her.mh108Gestation lasts between 89 and 92 days,ingomh108producing two to five cubs (most often two or three) during the rainy season (Nov–Dec),Collierswhen termites are more active.EBThey are born with their eyes open but initially are helpless,PKRand weigh around oz.ingoThe first six to eight weeks are spent in the den with their parents.br31The male may spend up to six hours a night watching over the cubs while the mother is out looking for food.mh108PKRAfter three months, they begin supervised foraging and by four months are normally independent, though they will often share a den with their mother until the next breeding season.br31By the time the next set of cubs is born, the older cubs have moved on.mh108Aardwolves generally achieve sexual maturity at one and a half to two years of age.ingoConservationThe aardwolf has not seen decreasing numbers and they are relatively widespread throughout eastern Africa. They are not common throughout their range, as they maintain a density of no more than 1 per square kilometer, if the food is good. Because of these factors, the IUCN has rated the aardwolf as least concern."IUCN"In some areas, they are persecuted by man because of the mistaken belief that they prey on livestock; however, they are actually beneficial to the farmers because they eat termites that are detrimental.PKRIn other areas, the farmers have recognized this, but they are still killed, on occasion, for their fur. Dogs and insecticides"IUCN"are also common killers of the aardwolf.br31Interaction with humansAardwolfs are common sights at zoos. Frankfurt Zoo in Germany was home to the oldest recorded aardwolf in captivity at 18 years and 11 months.w1;;Illustration of ''Proteles cristatus''NotesFootnotes30emReferences**************Further reading*External linksProteles cristatusProteles cristatus*F.