Abacus}}|synonyms_ref = 2013}}'''Abacá''' ( ;  ), binomial name '''''Musa textilis''''', is a species of banana native to the Philippines,1995 grown as a commercial crop in the Philippines, Ecuador, and Costa Rica. The plant, also known as '''Manila hemp''',GRINhas great economic importance, being harvested for its fiber, also called Manila hemp, extracted from the leaf-stems.bailThe plant grows to m,bail2and averages about m. The fiber was originally used for making twines and ropes; now most is pulped and used in a variety of specialized paper products including tea bags, filter paper and banknotes.  It is classified as a hard fiber, along with coir, henequin and sisal.DescriptionThe abacá plant is stoloniferous, meaning that the plant produces runners or shoots along the ground that then root at each segment.bail2Cutting and transplanting rooted runners is the primary technique for creating new plants, since seed growth is substantially slower. Abacá has a "false trunk" or pseudostem about cm in diameter.bailThe leaf stalks (petioles) are expanded at the base to form sheaths that are tightly wrapped together to form the pseudostem. There are from 12 to 25 leaves, dark green on the top and pale green on the underside, sometimes with large brown patches. They are oblong in shape with a deltoid base.bail2They grow in succession. The petioles grow to at least cm in length.bail2When the plant is mature, the flower stalk grows up inside the pseudostem. The male flower has 5 petals, each about cm long.bail2The leaf sheaths contain the valuable fiber. After harvesting, the coarse fibers range in length from cm long.bailThey are composed primarily of cellulose, lignin, and pectin.The fruit, which is inediblebailand is rarely seen as harvesting occurs before the plant fruits, grows to about cm in length and cm in diameter.bail2It has black turbinate seeds that are cm in diameter.bail2SystematicsThe abacá plant belongs to the banana family, Musaceae; it resembles the closely related wild seeded bananas, ''Musa acuminata'' and ''Musa balbisiana''. Its scientific name is ''Musa textilis''. Within the genus ''Musa'', it is placed in section ''Callimusa'' (now including the former section ''Australimusa''), members of which have a diploid chromosome number of 2n = 20.HistoryFile:Abaca fiber drying in Abaca farm, Costa Rica.jpg|thumb|Abaca fiber drying in abaca farm, Costa RicaBefore synthetic textiles came into use, ''M.textilis'' was a major source of high quality fiber: soft, silky and fine. Europeans first came into contact with it when Magellan made land in the Philippines in 1521, as the natives were cultivating it and utilizing it in bulk for textiles already.woodBy 1897, the Philippines were exporting almost 100,000 tons of abacá,worand it was one of the three biggest cash crops, along with tobacco and sugar. In fact, from 1850 through the end of the 19th century, sugar or abacá alternated with each other as the biggest export crop of the Philippines.dolanThis 19th century trade was predominantly with the United States and the making of ropes was done mainly in New England, although in time the rope-making was moved back to the Philippines.dolanExcluding the Philippines, abacá was first cultivated on a large scale in Sumatra in 1925 under the Dutch, who had observed its cultivation in the Philippines for cordage since the nineteenth century, followed up by plantings in Central America in 1929 sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. It also was transplanted into India and Guam.woodCommercial planting began in 1930 in British North Borneo; with the commencement of World War II, the supply from the Philippines was eliminated by the Japanese."eb"After the war, the U.S. Department of Agriculture started production in Panama, Costa Rica, Honduras, and Guatemala.woodToday, abacá is produced commercially in only three countries: Philippines, Ecuador, and Costa Rica. The Philippines produces between 85%"NIMBB"and 95%woodof the world's abacá, and the production employs 1.5 million people. Production has declined because of virus diseases.2013aFile:Abacá Mat.jpg|thumb|Mats made from woven Abacá fibers from the PhilippinesAncestors of the modern abaca might have originated from the Eastern Philippines where there are lot of rains (no pronounced dry season), in fact wild type of abaca can still be found in the interior forests of Catanduanes Island which is often not cultivated. Today, Catanduanes  has many other modern kinds of abaca which are more competitive. For many years, breeders from various research institutions have made the cultivated varieties of Catanduanes Island even more competitive in local and international markets. This results in the optimum production of the island which had a consistent highest production throughout the archipelago.UsesDue to its strength, it is a sought after product and is the strongest of the natural fibers.woodIt is used by the paper industry for such specialty uses such as teabags, banknotes and decorative papers.woodIt can be used to make handcrafts such as bags, carpets, clothing and furniture.  Abacá rope is very durable, flexible and resistant to salt water damage, allowing its use in hawsers, ship's lines and fishing nets."eb"A cm rope can require lb to break. Abacá fiber was once used primarily for rope, but this application is now of minor significance.  Lupis is the finest quality of abacá. Sinamay is woven chiefly from abacá.TextilesThe inner fibers are used in the making of hats, including the "Manila hats," hammocks, matting, cordage, ropes, coarse twines, and types of canvas. It is called Manila hemp in the market although it is unlike true hemp, and is lso known as Cebu hemp and Davao hemp. Abacá cloth is found in museum collections around the world, like the Boston Museum of Fine Arts and the Textile Museum of Canada.CultivationThe plant is normally grown in well-drained loamy soil, using rhizomes planted at the start of the rainy season."eb"In addition, new plants can be started by seeds.vanGrowers harvest abacá fields every three to eight months after an initial growth period of 12–25 months.bail"eb"Harvesting is done by removing the leaf-stems after flowering but before fruit appears.bailThe plant loses productivity between 15 and 40 years. The slopes of volcanoes provide a preferred growing environment."Colliers"Harvesting generally includes several operations involving the leaf sheaths:* tuxying (separation of primary and secondary sheath)* stripping (getting the fibers)* drying (usually following the tradition of sun-drying).When the processing is complete, the bundles of fiber are pale and lustrous with a length of m.In Costa Rica, more modern harvest and drying techniques are being developed to accommodate the very high yields obtained there.More than 80% of modern abaca production comes from the Philippines. Bicol is the top producing region while Catanduanes Island remains the top producing province in the Philippines. The Philippine Rural Development Program (PRDP) and the Department of Agriculture reported that in 2009-2013, Bicol Region had 39% share of Philippine abaca producution while overwhelming 92% comes from Catanduanes Island. Eastern Visayas, the second largest producer had 24% and the Davao Region, the third largest producer had 11% of the total production.PathogensAbacá is vulnerable to a number of pathogens, notably abaca bunchy top virus and abaca bract mosaic virus."NIMBB"See also*Piña*Batik*Fiber crop*International Year of Natural Fibres*Natural fiberNotesFootnotes40emReferences**************External linksMusa textilisAbaca*The World Book encyclopedia set, 1988.*See International Year of Natural Fibres 2009*Christenhusz, M.J.M. (2009). Typification of ornamental plants: ''Musa textilis'' (Musaceae). ''Phytotaxa'' 2: 53-54.