'''Abadeh''' (, also Romanized as '''Ābādeh''')-3051024 is a city in  and the capital of Abadeh County, in Fars Province, Iran. Abadeh is situated at an elevation of -1 in a fertile plain on the high road between Isfahan and Shiraz, km from the former and km from the latter.  At the 2006 census, its population was 52,042, in 14,184 families.07  As of 2009, the population was estimated to be 59042.[Iran Statics Organization]It is the largest city in the Northern Fars Region (South Central-Iran), which is famed for its carved wood-work, made of the wood of pear and box trees."Chisholm"Sesame oil, castor oil, grain, and various fruits are also produced there. The area is famous for its Abadeh rugs.An interesting fact is that Abadeh is closer, road-distance-wise to 4 provincial capitals of Isfahan (193km), Yasuj (197km), Yazd (217km), and Shahrekord (237km) compared to the distance to the provincial capital of its corresponding province, Shiraz (260km).Landmarks and craftsAbadeh historical monuments include Emirate Kolah Farangi, Tymcheh Sarafyan and Khaje tomb, located in the Khoja mountains.Abadeh crafts can be embroidered in cotton. The town also produces Abadeh rugs.Transportation'''Expressway 65''' passes through Abadeh. This situation helps Abadeh to improve its capabilities compared to the neighboring city, Eqlid. Road 78 makes connections from Abadeh to Abarkuh, Yazd Eqlid and Yasuj. It has a junction with Abadeh Shiraz Expressway 24km south of the city. A road starts from Abadeh Ring Road to Soqad and Semirom, Road 55.The railroad from Isfahan to Shiraz passes Abadeh and there are train services at Abadeh Railway Station to Shiraz, Esfahan, Tehran and Mashad. Abadeh Airport (OISA) was planned to be built in mid 1990s.SportAbadeh's main sport is Football, like the rest of the country. The main stadium is Takhti Stadium located in Mo'allem Square. The main team in Abadeh is Behineh Rahbar Abadeh F.C. which is currently playing in Iran Football's 3rd Division after finishing first in Fars Provincial League (FPL) last year. It played in Hazfi Cup 2010-11 reaching the fourth round.Air Defense BaseIran announced in 2012 the construction of the largest air defense site in the southern Iranian city of Abadeh.ClimateAbadeh features a continental semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification|Köppen ''BSk'') with extreme heat and dryness over summer, and cold (extreme at times) and wet winter, with huge variations between daytime and nighttime throughout the year.References