'''Abersychan''' is a settlement and community north of Pontypool in Torfaen, Wales, and lies within the boundaries of the historic county of Monmouthshire and the preserved county of Gwent.Abersychan lies in the narrow northern section of the Afon Lwyd valley.The town includes two schools; Abersychan Comprehensive School and Victoria Primary School; together with various shops and other amenities including Abersychan Rugby Club.Abersychan was the birthplace of the politicians Roy Jenkins, Don Touhig and Paul Murphy (MP for Torfaen), and of the rugby footballers Wilfred Hodder, Candy Evans and Bryn Meredith.HistoryAbersychan was a thriving industrial centre in the 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly for iron production. 1911The principal ironworks were built by the British Iron Company in 1825; the works passed to the New British Iron Company in 1843 and to the Ebbw Vale Company in 1852, before closing in 1889.On 6 February 1890, an underground explosion at Llanerch Colliery killed 176.Local governmentAbersychan constitutes a community and electoral ward of the county borough of Torfaen. The area was part of the ancient parish of Trevethin, in Monmouthshire. On 3 June 1864 Abersychan was constituted a local government district, governed by a local board. In 1894 Abersychan became an urban district and civil parish. The urban district was abolished in 1935, with most of its area passing to Pontypool urban district, and a small area going to Abercarn UD.In 1974 the area became part of the borough of Torfaen, in the new local government county of Gwent. The community of Abersychan was formed in 1985, but no community council has yet been formed. Abersychan and Cwmavon is now a ward for the Pontypool Community Council. In 1996 Torfaen became a unitary authority.The Abersychan community includes Abersychan, Cwmavon, Garndiffaith, Pentwyn, Talywain, Varteg, and Victoria Village.Local TransportThe nearest railway stations to Abersychan are Pontypool and New Inn railway station|Pontypool ; New Inn (3 miles), Llanhilleth (3.5 miles) and Abergavenny (7 miles). Abersychan was served by the following (disused) stations:*Abersychan and Talywain railway station*Abersychan Low Level railway stationPlaces nearbyPentwyn''Pentwyn'', Torfaen is a small village located in the district of Abersychan. It contains a post office, a chapel, several houses and a small play park. The village has a cricket team (Pentwyn CC) and is located right next to the old railway line. The cricket club celebrated its 100-year anniversary in 2006 with a successful tour to Cork, Ireland. The village has superb views over the River Severn and Newport to the south.Victoria Village''Victoria Village'' is a small hamlet located in the district of Abersychan. It comprises a small village school and a number of houses. A small group of houses on Incline Road mark the beginning of the village and the village boundary is near Cwmavon. Victoria Primary School is also in this area, housed in large grounds. Many homes are built around the school's boundaries.NotesReferences*See alsoWales