File:Fleet 5 nations.jpg|thumb|300px|Four modern aircraft carriers of various types—6, ''Charles de Gaulle'', 6, helicopter carrier 6—and escort vessels, 2002File:Principe-de-Asturias Wasp Forrestal Invincible 1991 DN-ST-92-01129s.jpg|thumb|upright=1.25|''From bottom to top:'' Spanish light V/STOL carrier ''Príncipe de Asturias'', amphibious assault ship 6, fleet carrier 6, and light V/STOL carrier 6, showing size differences of late 20th century carriers, 1991An '''aircraft carrier''' is a warship that serves as a seagoing airbase, equipped with a full-length flight deck and facilities for carrying, arming, deploying, and recovering aircraft. Typically, it is the capital ship of a fleet, as it allows a naval force to project air power worldwide without depending on local bases for staging aircraft operations. Aircraft carriers are expensive to build and are critical assets. Aircraft carriers have evolved from converted cruisers to nuclear-powered warships that carry numerous fighter planes, strike aircraft, helicopters, and other types of aircraft.There is no single definition of an "aircraft carrier", and modern navies use several variants of the type. These variants are sometimes categorized as sub-types of aircraft carriers, and sometimes as distinct types of naval aviation-capable ships."gscarrier"Aircraft carriers may be classified according to the type of aircraft they carry and their operational assignments. Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope, former head of the Royal Navy, has said that "To put it simply, countries that aspire to strategic international influence have aircraft carriers".Carriers have evolved since their inception in the early twentieth century from wooden vessels used to deploy balloons to nuclear-powered warships that carry dozens of aircraft, including fighter jets and helicopters. As of , there are thirty-seven active aircraft carriers in the world within twelve navies. The United States Navy has 10 large nuclear-powered carriers (known as supercarriers, carrying up to 90 aircraft each), the largest carriers in the world; the total deckspace is over twice that of all other nations' combined. As well as the supercarrier fleet, the US Navy has nine amphibious assault ships used primarily for helicopters (sometimes called helicopter carriers); these can also carry up to 25 fighter jets, and in some cases, are as large as some other nations' fixed-wing carriers.3Types of carrierFile:A12 ; CVN76.jpg|thumb|Brazilian aircraft carrier Brazilian aircraft carrier São Paulo (A12)|NAe ''São Paulo'', foreground, and U.S. Navy carrier 6 during a combined training exercise.File:USS Enterprise FS Charles de Gaulle.jpg|thumb|6 a supercarrier of the US Navy (left), sails alongside 2, a fleet carrier of the French Navy (right) both of which have the CATOBAR configuration.File:Cavour (550) - Civitavecchia harbour, Italy - June 2011.jpg|thumb|right|2, a light aircraft carrier of the Italian Navy.File:HMS Ocean MOD 45151277.jpg|thumb|right|6 of the Royal Navy, an amphibious assault ship/helicopter carrier.Basic types* Amphibious assault ship* Anti-submarine warfare carrier* Balloon carrier and balloon tenders* Escort carrier* Fleet carrier* Flight deck cruiser* Helicopter carrier* Light aircraft carrier* Sea Control Ship* Seaplane tender and seaplane carriers* Supercarrier''(note: some of the types listed here are not strictly defined as aircraft carriers by some sources)'';By roleA ''fleet carrier'' is intended to operate with the main fleet and usually provides an offensive capability. These are the largest carriers capable of fast speeds. By comparison, ''escort carriers'' were developed to provide defense for convoys of ships. They were smaller and slower with lower numbers of aircraft carried. Most were built from mercantile hulls or, in the case of merchant aircraft carriers, were bulk cargo ships with a flight deck added on top. ''Light aircraft carriers'' were carriers that were fast enough to operate with the fleet but of smaller size with reduced aircraft capacity. Soviet aircraft carriers now in use by Russia are actually called ''heavy aviation cruisers'', these ships while sized in the range of large fleet carriers were designed to deploy alone or with escorts and provide both strong defensive weaponry and heavy offensive missiles equivalent to a guided missile cruiser in addition to supporting fighters and helicopters.By configurationFile:INS Vikramaditya (R33) close shot.jpg |thumb|Vikramaditya of the Indian Navy has the STOBAR configuration.There are four main configurations of aircraft carrier in service in the world's navies, divided by the way that aircraft take off and land:* ''Catapult-assisted take-off but arrested-recovery'' (''CATOBAR''): these carriers generally carry the largest, heaviest, and most heavily armed aircraft, although smaller CATOBAR carriers may have other limitations (weight capacity of aircraft elevator, etc.). Three nations currently operate carriers of this type: ten by the United States, and one each by France and Brazil for a total of twelve in service.* ''Short take-off but arrested-recovery'' (''STOBAR''): these carriers are generally limited to carrying lighter fixed-wing aircraft with more limited payloads. STOBAR carrier air wings, such as the Sukhoi Su-33 and future Mikoyan MiG-29K wings of 2 are often geared primarily towards air superiority and fleet defense roles rather than strike/power projection tasks, which require heavier payloads (bombs and air-to-ground missiles). Currently, Russia, China, and India possess commissioned carriers of this type.* ''Short take-off vertical-landing'' (''STOVL''): limited to carrying STOVL aircraft. STOVL aircraft, such as the Harrier Jump Jet family and Yakovlev Yak-38 generally have very limited payloads, lower performance, and high fuel consumption when compared with conventional fixed-wing aircraft; however, a new generation of STOVL aircraft, currently consisting of the F-35B has much improved performance. This type of aircraft carrier is in service with one for India and two for Italy, Spain also operates one amphibious assault ship as a STOVL aircraft carrier for four ships total in active carrier service; Thailand has one active STOVL carrier but it no longer has any operational STOVL aircraft in inventory. Some also count the nine US amphibious assault ships in their secondary light carrier role boosting the overall total to fourteen.* ''Helicopter Carrier'': Helicopter carriers have a similar appearance to other aircraft carriers and may have regular fixed wing operations. Some are designed for addition of, or may include, a ski jump ramp allowing for STOVL operations or may have an unused ski jump installed before retirement of STOVL aircraft and re-purposing. In the past conventional carriers were converted and called commando carriers. Some helicopter carriers with a resistant flight surface can operate VTOL jets. Currently the majority of helicopter carriers, but not all, are classified as amphibious assault ships, tasked with landing and supporting ground forces on enemy territory. The US has nine of this type, France three, Japan two, the UK one, the Republic of Korea (South Korea) one and Spain one. The US and Spain's amphibious assault ships operate STOVL jets in normal deployment.By size* Supercarrier* Fleet carrier* Light aircraft carrier* Escort carrierHull type identification symbolsSeveral systems of identification symbol for aircraft carriers and related types of ship have been used. These include the pennant numbers used by the British Royal Navy and some Commonwealth countries, the US hull classification symbols also used by NATO and some other countries, and the Canadian hull classification symbols.{| class="wikitable"|+ US hull classification symbols for aircraft carriers and related types! Symbol !! Designation|-| CV || Generic aircraft carrier|-| CVA || Attack carrier|-| CVAN || Nuclear-powered attack carrier|-| CVE || Escort carrier|-| CVG || Flight deck cruiser (proposed)|-| CVHA || Aircraft carrier, Helicopter Assault (retired)|-| CVHE || Aircraft carrier, Helicopter, Escort (retired)|-| CVL || Light aircraft carrier|-| CVN || Nuclear-powered aircraft carrier|-| CVS || Anti-submarine warfare carrier|-| CVV || Aircraft Carrier, Medium (proposed)|-| LHA || Landing Helicopter Assault, a type of Amphibious assault ship|-| LHD || Landing Helicopter Dock, a type of Amphibious assault ship|-| LPH || Landing Platform Helicopter, a type of Amphibious assault ship|}HistoryTimeline for aircraft carrier serviceOriginsright|The  conducted the world's first naval-launched air raids in 1914.The 1903 advent of heavier-than-air fixed-wing aircraft was closely followed in 1910 by the first experimental take-off of an airplane, made from the deck of a United States Navy vessel (cruiser 6), and the first experimental landings were conducted in 1911. On 9 May 1912 the first airplane take-off from a ship underway was made from the deck of the British Royal Navy's 6. Seaplane tender support ships came next, with the French 2 of 1911. In September 1914 the Imperial Japanese Navy 2 conducted the world's first successful ship-launched air raid: on 6 September 1914 a Farman aircraft launched by ''Wakamiya'' attacked the Austro-Hungarian cruiser Kaiserin Elisabeth and the German gunboat ''Jaguar'' in Kiaochow Bay off Tsingtao; neither was hit. The first carrier-launched airstrike was the Tondern Raid in July 1918. Seven Sopwith Camels launched from the converted battlecruiser HMS Furious damaged the German airbase at Tønder and destroyed two zeppelins.File:Japanese aircraft carrier Hōshō Tokyo Bay.jpg|thumb|Aerial view of  of the Imperial Japanese Navy as completed in December 1922.The development of flattop vessels produced the first large fleet ships. In 1918, 6 became the world's first carrier capable of launching and recovering naval aircraft. As a result of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922, which limited the construction of new heavy surface combat ships, most early aircraft carriers were conversions of ships that were laid down (or had served) as different ship types: cargo ships, cruisers, battlecruisers, or battleships. These conversions gave rise to the 2s (1927), 2 and 4. Specialist carrier evolution was well underway, with several navies ordering and building warships that were purposefully designed to function as aircraft carriers by the mid-1920s, resulting in the commissioning of ships such as  (1922), 6 (1924), and  (1927). During World War II, these ships would become known as fleet carriers.World War IIFile:Attack on carrier USS Franklin 19 March 1945.jpg|thumb|Attack on carrier 6, 19 March 1945. The casualties included 724 killed. File:USS Enterprise (CV-6) in Puget Sound, September 1945.jpg|thumb|6, the most decorated US ship of World War II.The aircraft carrier dramatically changed naval combat in World War II, because air power was becoming a significant factor in warfare. The advent of aircraft as focal weapons was driven by the superior range, flexibility and effectiveness of carrier-launched aircraft. They had higher range and precision than naval guns, making them highly effective. The versatility of the carrier was demonstrated in November 1940 when 6 launched a long-range strike on the Italian fleet at their base in Taranto, signalling the beginning of the effective and highly mobile aircraft strikes. This operation incapacitated three of the six battleships at a cost of two torpedo bombers. World War II in the Pacific Ocean involved clashes between aircraft carrier fleets. The 1941 Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor was a clear illustration of the power projection capability afforded by a large force of modern carriers. Concentrating six carriers in a single unit turned naval history about, as no other nation had fielded anything comparable. However, the vulnerability of carriers compared to traditional battleships when forced into a gun-range encounter was quickly illustrated by the sinking of Glorious by German battleships during the Norwegian campaign in 1940.This new-found importance of naval aviation forced nations to create a number of carriers, in efforts to provide air superiority cover for every major fleet in order to ward off enemy aircraft. This extensive usage required the construction of several new 'light' carriers. Escort aircraft carriers, such as 6, were sometimes purpose-built, but most were converted from merchant ships as a stop-gap measure to provide anti-submarine air support for convoys and amphibious invasions. Following this concept, light aircraft carriers built by the US, such as 6, represented a larger, more "militarized" version of the escort carrier. Although with similar complement to Escort carriers, they had the advantage of speed from their converted cruiser hulls. The UK 1942 Design Light Fleet Carrier was designed for building quickly by civilian shipyards and with an expected service life of about 3 years. They served the Royal Navy during the war and was the hull design chosen for nearly all aircraft carrier equipped navies after the war until the 1980s. Emergencies also spurred the creation or conversion of highly unconventional aircraft carriers. CAM ships, were cargo-carrying merchant ships that could launch (but not retrieve) a single fighter aircraft from a catapult to defend the convoy from long range German aircraft.Postwar eraUSS ''Tripoli'', a US Navy ''Iwo Jima''-class helicopter carrierFile:USS Enterprise (CVN-65).jpg|thumb|CVN-65, the world's first nuclear-powered carrier commissioned in 1961.Before World War II, international naval treaties of 1922, 1930 and 1936 limited the size of capital ships including carriers.Since World War II, aircraft carrier designs have increased in size to accommodate a steady increase in aircraft size. The large, modern 4 of US carriers has a displacement nearly four times that of the World War II–era 6, yet its complement of aircraft is roughly the same—a consequence of the steadily increasing size and weight of military aircraft over the years. Today's aircraft carriers are so expensive that nations which operate them risk significant political, economic, and military impact if a carrier is lost, or even used in conflict.Modern navies that operate such aircraft carriers treat them as the capital ship of the fleet, a role previously held by the battleship. This change took place during World War II in response to air power becoming a significant factor in warfare, driven by the superior range, flexibility and effectiveness of carrier-launched aircraft. Following the war, carrier operations continued to increase in size and importance. Supercarriers, displacing 75,000tonnes or greater, have become the pinnacle of carrier development. Some are powered by nuclear reactors and form the core of a fleet designed to operate far from home. Amphibious assault ships, such as 6 and 6, serve the purpose of carrying and landing Marines, and operate a large contingent of helicopters for that purpose. Also known as "commando carriers" or "helicopter carriers", many have the capability to operate VSTOL aircraft.Lacking the firepower of other warships, carriers by themselves are considered vulnerable to attack by other ships, aircraft, submarines, or missiles. Therefore, an aircraft carrier is generally accompanied by a number of other ships to provide protection for the relatively unwieldy carrier, to carry supplies and perform other support services, and to provide additional offensive capabilities. The resulting group of ships is often termed a battle group, carrier group, or carrier battle group.There is a view that modern anti-ship weapons systems, such as torpedoes and missiles, have made aircraft carriers obsolete as too vulnerable for modern combat.  On the other hand, the threatening role of aircraft carriers has a place in modern asymmetric warfare, like the gunboat diplomacy of the past. Furthermore, aircraft carriers facilitate quick and precise projections of overwhelming military power into such local and regional conflicts.Aircraft carriers in serviceUS Navy personnel direct an aircraft onto a catapult aboard the Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS ''John C. Stennis''.List of aircraft carriers in serviceMost navies operate only one or two aircraft carriers, if any. The USA is a notable exception, with 10 super carriers and 9 amphibious assault ships in service.A total of 20 fleet carriers are in active service with ten navies. Additionally, the navies of Australia, Brazil, China, France, India, Italy, Japan, Russia, South Korea, Spain, Thailand and the United States also operate ships capable of carrying and operating multiple helicopters and STOVL aircraft.*CATOBAR types are operated by Brazil, France and especially the USA, which has ten in service.*STOBAR type are operated by China, India and Russia.*STOVL types are operated by India, Italy, Spain and the USA.Among helicopter-only types:*ASW ships are operated by Japan.*An offshore helicopter support ship is operated by Thailand.*Amphibious assault ships are operated by France, the Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom and especially the USA, which has nine in service.Future of aircraft carriersA good many aircraft carriers and related types are planned, under construction or undergoing commissioning activity.The Royal Australian Navy is in the process of procuring two Canberra-class LHD's, the first of which was commissioned in November 2015, while the second is expected to enter service in 2016. The ships will be the largest in Australian naval history. Their primary roles are to embark, transport and deploy an embarked force and to carry out or support humanitarian assistance missions. The LHD is capable of launching multiple helicopters at one time while maintaining an amphibious capability of 1,000 troops and their supporting vehicles (tanks, armoured personnel carriers etc.). The Australian Defence Minister has publicly raised the possibility of procuring F-35B STOVL aircraft for the carrier, stating that it "has been on the table since day one and stating the LHD's are "STOVL capable".File:INS Vikrant being undocked at the Cochin Shipyard Limited in 2015 (02).jpg|thumb|6, an indigenously-built aircraft carrier (IAC) was undocked on 10 June 2015.File:JS Izumo (DDH-183) just after her launch.jpg|thumb|Izumo just after her launch.In December 2009, then Indian Navy chief Admiral Nirmal Kumar Verma said at his maiden navy week press conference that concepts currently being examined by the Directorate of Naval Design for the second indigenous aircraft carrier (IAC-2), are for a conventionally powered carrier displacing over 50,000 tons and equipped with steam catapults (rather than the ski-jump on the INS Vikramaditya|''Gorshkov''/''Vikramaditya'' and the IAC) to launch fourth-generation aircraft."indiatoday.intoday.in"Later on in August 2013 Vice Admiral RK Dhowan, while talking about the detailed study underway on the IAC-II project, said that nuclear propulsion was also being considered. The navy also evaluated the Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS), which is being used by the US Navy in their latest 1s. General Atomics, the developer of the EMALS, was cleared by the US government to give a technical demonstration to Indian Navy officers, who were impressed by the new capabilities of the system. The EMALS enables launching varied aircraft including unmanned combat air vehicles (UCAV). The aim is to have a total of three aircraft carriers in service, with two fully operational carriers and the third in refit.In August 2013, a launching ceremony for Japan's largest military ship since World War II was held in Yokohama. The , 19,500-ton flattop 2 was deployed in March 2015. The ship is able to carry up to 14 helicopters; however, only seven ASW helicopters and two SAR helicopters were planned for the initial aircraft complement. For other operations, 400 troops and fifty 3.5t trucks (or equivalent equipment) can also be carried. The flight deck has five helicopter landing spots that allow simultaneous landings or take-offs. The ship is equipped with two Phalanx CIWS and two SeaRAM for its defense. The destroyers of this class were initially intended to replace the two ships of the 4, which were originally scheduled to begin decommissioning in FY2014.Speaking in St. Petersburg, Russia on 30 June 2011, the head of Russia's United Shipbuilding Corporation said his company expected to begin design work for a new carrier in 2016, with a goal of beginning construction in 2018 and having the carrier achieve initial operational capability by 2023. Several months later, on 3 November 2011 the Russian newspaper ''Izvestiya'' reported that the naval building plan now included (first) the construction of a new shipyard capable of building large hull ships, after which Moscow will build two (80,000 tons full load each) nuclear-powered aircraft carriers by 2027. The spokesperson said one carrier would be assigned to the Russian Navy's Northern Fleet at Murmansk, and the second would be stationed with the Pacific Fleet at Vladivostok.The Republic of Korea Navy (South Korea) believes it can deploy two light aircraft carriers by 2036 and expand its blue-water force to cope with the rapid naval buildups of China and Japan, according to a Navy source.File:HMS Queen Elizabeth.jpg|thumb|right|6, the lead 0 supercarrier.The British Royal Navy is constructing two new larger STOVL aircraft carriers, the 4, to replace the three 0 carriers. The ships will be named 6 and 6. They will be able to operate up to 40 aircraft in peace time with a tailored group of up to 50, and will have a displacement of 70,600tonnes. The ships are due to become operational from 2020. Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs, and their ship's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1,600 when the air group is embarked. Defensive weapons will include the Phalanx Close-In Weapons System for anti-aircraft and anti-missile defence; also 30 mm Automated Small Calibre Guns and miniguns for use against fast attack craft. The two ships will be the largest warships ever built for the Royal Navy.The current US fleet of 0 carriers will be followed into service (and in some cases replaced) by the ten-ship 4. It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to staff, maintain and operate its supercarriers. The main new features are implementation of Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS) (which replace the old steam catapults) and unmanned aerial vehicles. With the deactivation of 6 in December 2012 (decommissioning scheduled for 2016), the U.S. fleet comprises 10 active supercarriers. On 24 July 2007, the House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee recommended seven or eight new carriers (one every four years). However, the debate has deepened over budgeting for the $12–14.5billion (plus $12billion for development and research) for the 100,000 ton ''Gerald R. Ford''-class carrier (estimated service 2016) compared to the smaller $2billion 45,000 ton 1s able to deploy squadrons of F-35B of which one is already active, another is under construction and nine more are planned.DescriptionStructureFile:USS Roosevelt CV-42 Med 1976-77.jpg|thumb|right|STOVL Harriers preparing to takeoff from CATOBAR carrier, 6Carriers are large and long ships, although there is a high degree of variation depending on their intended role and aircraft complement. The size of the carrier has varied over history and among navies, to cater to the various roles that global climates have demanded from naval aviation.Regardless of size, the ship itself must house their complement of aircraft, with space for launching, storing, and maintaining them. Space is also required for the large crew, supplies (food, munitions, fuel, engineering parts), and propulsion. US supercarriers are notable for having nuclear reactors powering their systems and propulsion. This makes the carrier reasonably tall.The top of the carrier is the flight deck, where aircraft are launched and recovered. On the starboard side of this is the island, where air-traffic control and the bridge are located.The constraints of constructing a flight deck affect the role of a given carrier strongly, as they influence the weight, type, and configuration of the aircraft that may be launched. For example, assisted launch mechanisms are used primarily for heavy aircraft, especially those loaded with air-to-ground weapons. CATOBAR is most commonly used on USN supercarriers as it allows the deployment of heavy jets with full loadouts, especially on ground-attack missions. STOVL is used by other navies because it is cheaper to operate and still provides good deployment capability for fighter aircraft.File:DeHavilland Vampire HMS Ocean Dec1945 NAN1 47.jpg|thumb|The first carrier landing and take-off of a jet aircraft: Eric "Winkle" Brown landing on 6 in 1945.Due to the busy nature of the flight deck, only 20 or so aircraft may be on it at any one time. A hangar storage several decks below the flight deck is where most aircraft are kept, and aircraft are taken from the lower storage decks to the flight deck through the use of an elevator. The hangar is usually quite large and can take up several decks of vertical space.How Aircraft Carriers Work, ''How Stuff Works'', by Tom Harris – Accessed 5 October 2013Munitions are commonly stored on the lower decks because they are highly explosive should the compartment they are in be breached. Usually this is below the water line so that the area can be flooded in case of emergency.Flight deckFlight deckFile:US Navy 081124-N-3659B-305 F-A-18C Hornets launch from the Nimitz-class aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan (CVN 76).jpg|thumb|Catapult launches aboard Ronald Reagan.File:Vikramaditya 5.jpg|thumb| Expansive Flight Deck of Vikramaditya at night showing the ski-jump ramp used for STOBAR configurationFile:An F-35B Lightning II aircraft lands aboard the amphibious assault ship USS Wasp (LHD 1).jpg|thumb|An F-35B Lightning II aircraft lands aboard the amphibious assault ship 6As "runways at sea", aircraft carriers have a flat-top flight deck, which launches and recovers aircraft. Aircraft launch forward, into the wind, and are recovered from astern. The flight deck is where the most notable differences between a carrier and a land runway are found. Creating such a surface at sea poses constraints on the carrier – for example, the fact that it is a ship means that a full-length runway would be costly to construct and maintain. This affects take-off procedure, as a shorter runway length of the deck requires that aircraft accelerate more quickly to gain lift. This either requires a thrust boost, a vertical component to its velocity, or a reduced take-off load (to lower mass). The differing types of deck configuration, as above, influence the structure of the flight deck. The form of launch assistance a carrier provides is strongly related to the types of aircraft embarked and the design of the carrier itself.There are two main philosophies in order to keep the deck short: add thrust to the aircraft, such as using a Catapult Assisted Take-Off (CATO-); and changing the direction of the airplanes' thrust, as in Vertical and/or Short Take-Off (V/STO-). Each method has advantages and disadvantages of its own:*Catapult Assisted Take-Off But Arrested Recovery (CATOBAR): A steam-powered catapult is connected to the aircraft, and is used to accelerate conventional aircraft to a safe flying speed. By the end of the catapult stroke, the aircraft is airborne and further propulsion is provided by its own engines. This is the most expensive method as it requires complex machinery to be installed under the flight deck, but allows for even heavily-loaded aircraft to take off.*Short take-off but arrested recovery (STOBAR) depends on increasing the net lift on the aircraft. Aircraft do not require catapult assistance for take off; instead on nearly all ships of this type an upwards vector is provided by a ski-jump at the forward end of the flight deck, often combined with thrust vectoring by the aircraft. Alternatively, by reducing the fuel and weapon load, an aircraft is able to reach faster speeds and generate more upwards lift and launch without a ski-jump or catapult.*Short take-off vertical-landing (STOVL): On aircraft carriers, non-catapult-assisted, fixed-wing short takeoffs are accomplished with the use of thrust vectoring, which may also be used in conjunction with a runway "ski-jump". Use of STOVL tends to allow aircraft to carry a larger payload as compared to during VTOL use, while still only requiring a short runway. The most famous examples are the Hawker Siddeley Harrier and the Sea Harrier. Although technically VTOL aircraft, they are operationally STOVL aircraft due to the extra weight carried at take-off for fuel and armaments. The same is true of the F-35B Lightning II, which demonstrated VTOL capability in test flights but is operationally STOVL.*Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL): Aircraft are specifically designed for the purpose of using very high degrees of thrust vectoring (e.g. if the thrust to weight-force ratio is greater than 1, it can take off vertically), but are usually slower than conventionally-propelled aircraft.On the recovery side of the flight deck, the adaptation to the aircraft loadout is mirrored. Non-VTOL or conventional aircraft cannot decelerate on their own, and almost all carriers using them must have arrested-recovery systems (-BAR, e.g. CATO''BAR'' or STO''BAR'') to recover their aircraft. Aircraft that are landing extend a tailhook that catches on arrestor wires stretched across the deck to bring themselves to a stop in a short distance. Post-WWII Royal Navy research on safer CATOBAR recovery eventually led to universal adoption of a landing area angled off axis to allow aircraft who missed the arresting wires to "bolt" and safely return to flight for another landing attempt rather than crashing into aircraft on the forward deck.If the aircraft are VTOL-capable or helicopters, they do not need to decelerate and hence there is no such need. The arrested-recovery system has used an angled deck since the 1950s because, in case the aircraft does not catch the arresting wire, the short deck allows easier take off by reducing the number of objects between the aircraft and the end of the runway. It also has the advantage of separating the recovery operation area from the launch area. Helicopters and aircraft capable of vertical or short take-off and landing (V/STOL) usually recover by coming abreast the carrier on the port side and then using their hover capability to move over the flight deck and land vertically without the need for arresting gear.Staff and Deck OperationsFile:F-18 - A 3-wire landing.ogv|thumb|F/A-18 landing videoCarriers steam at speed, up to  into the wind during flight deck operations to increase wind speed over the deck to a safe minimum. This increase in effective wind speed provides a higher launch airspeed for aircraft at the end of the catapult stroke or ski-jump, as well as making recovery safer by reducing the difference between the relative speeds of the aircraft and ship.Since the early 1950s on conventional carriers it has been the practice to recover aircraft at an angle to port of the axial line of the ship. The primary function of this angled deck is to allow aircraft that miss the arresting wires, referred to as a bolter, to become airborne again without the risk of hitting aircraft parked forward. The angled deck allows the installation of one or two "waist" catapults in addition to the two bow cats. An angled deck also improves launch and recovery cycle flexibility with the option of simultaneous launching and recovery of aircraft.Conventional ("tailhook") aircraft rely upon a landing signal officer (LSO, radio call sign ''paddles'') to monitor the aircraft's approach, visually gauge glideslope, attitude, and airspeed, and transmit that data to the pilot. Before the angled deck emerged in the 1950s, LSOs used colored paddles to signal corrections to the pilot (hence the nickname). From the late 1950s onward, visual landing aids such as Optical Landing System have provided information on proper glide slope, but LSOs still transmit voice calls to approaching pilots by radio.File:USS Harry S Truman (CVN-75) Flight Deck.JPG|thumb|left||F/A-18 Hornets on the flight deck of the 0 2Key personnel involved in the flight deck include the shooters, the handler, and the air boss. Shooters are naval aviators or Naval Flight Officers and are responsible for launching aircraft. The handler works just inside the island from the flight deck and is responsible for the movement of aircraft before launching and after recovery. The "air boss" (usually a commander) occupies the top bridge (Primary Flight Control, also called ''primary'' or ''the tower'') and has the overall responsibility for controlling launch, recovery and "those aircraft in the air near the ship, and the movement of planes on the flight deck, which itself resembles a well-choreographed ballet." The captain of the ship spends most of his time one level below primary on the Navigation Bridge. Below this is the Flag Bridge, designated for the embarked admiral and his staff.To facilitate working on the flight deck of a U.S. aircraft carrier, the sailors wear colored shirts that designate their responsibilities. There are at least seven different colors worn by flight deck personnel for modern United States Navy carrier air operations. Carrier operations of other nations use similar color schemes.Deck structuresFile:US Navy 100512-N-8446A-004 An F-A-18F Super Hornet assigned to the Fighting Checkmates of Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 211 lands aboard the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise (CVN 65).jpg|thumb|Island control structure of 6The superstructure of a carrier (such as the bridge, flight control tower) are concentrated in a relatively small area called an ''island'', a feature pioneered on the 6 in 1923. While the island is usually built on the starboard side of the fight deck, the Japanese aircraft carriers 2 and  had their islands built on the port side. Very few carriers have been designed or built without an island. The ''flush deck'' configuration proved to have significant drawbacks, primary of which was management of the exhaust from the power plant. Fumes coming across the deck were a major issue in 6. In addition, lack of an island meant difficulties managing the flight deck, performing air traffic control, a lack of radar housing placements and problems with navigating and controlling the ship itself.Another deck structure that can be seen is a ski-jump ramp at the forward end of the flight deck. This was first developed to help launch STOVL aircraft take off at far higher weights than is possible with a vertical or rolling takeoff on flat decks. Originally developed by the Royal Navy, it since has been adopted by many navies for smaller carriers. A ski-jump ramp works by converting some of the forward rolling movement of the aircraft into vertical velocity and is sometimes combined with the aiming of jet thrust partly downwards. This allows heavily loaded and fueled aircraft a few more precious seconds to attain sufficient air velocity and lift to sustain normal flight. Without a ski-jump launching fully loaded and fueled aircraft such as the Harrier would not be possible on a smaller flat deck ship before either stalling out or crashing directly into the sea.File:FRS.1 ski-jump take-off HMS Invincible.JPEG|thumb|left|Ski-jump on Royal Navy carrier 6Although STOVL aircraft are capable of taking off vertically from a spot on the deck, using the ramp and a running start is far more fuel efficient and permits a heavier launch weight. As catapults are unnecessary, carriers with this arrangement reduce weight, complexity, and space needed for complex steam or electromagnetic launching equipment, vertical landing aircraft also remove the need for arresting cables and related hardware. Russian, Chinese, and future Indian carriers include a ski-jump ramp for launching lightly loaded conventional fighter aircraft but recover using traditional carrier arresting cables and a tailhook on their aircraft.The disadvantage of the ski-jump is the penalty it exacts on aircraft size, payload, and fuel load (and thus range); heavily laden aircraft can not launch using a ski-jump because their high loaded weight requires either a longer takeoff roll than is possible on a carrier deck, or assistance from a catapult or JATO rocket. For example, the Russian Su-33 is only able to launch from the carrier 2 with a minimal armament and fuel load. Another disadvantage is on mixed flight deck operations where helicopters are also present such as a US Landing Helicopter Dock or Landing Helicopter Assault amphibious assault ship a ski jump is not included as this would eliminate one or more helicopter landing areas, this flat deck limits the loading of Harriers but is somewhat mitigated by the longer rolling start provided by a long flight deck compared to many STOVL carriers.National fleetsList of aircraft carriers in serviceFile:World Navy Aircraft carries chart.svg|thumb|right|upright=1.35|Chart of aircraft and helicopter carriers from around the worldA total of 20 fleet carriers are in active service with ten navies. Additionally, the navies of Australia, Brazil, China, France, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Spain, Thailand and the United States also operate ships capable of carrying and operating multiple helicopters and STOVL aircraft.AustraliaFile:HMAS Canberra (LHD 02) at berth prior to commissioning.jpg|thumb|right|6, a 1CurrentThe 4 of landing helicopter docks, based on the Spanish vessel 2, is composed of two ships one of which has just entered service. The class is being built by Navantia and BAE Systems Australia; and 6 is the largest ship ever built for the Royal Australian Navy. ''Canberra'' underwent sea trials in late 2013 and was commissioned in 2014.''Canberra''s sister ship, 6, was commissioned in December 2015. The Australian version retains the ski-ramp from the ''Juan Carlos I'' design, although the RAN has not acquired carrier based fixed-wing aircraft.BrazilFile:Sao Paulo carrier.jpg|thumb|right| of the Brazilian NavyCurrentOne CATOBAR carrier:  is a 1 currently in service with the Brazilian Navy. ''São Paulo'' was first commissioned in 1963 by the French Navy as 2 and was transferred in 2000 to Brazil, where she became the new flagship of the Brazilian Navy. During the period from 2005–2010, ''São Paulo'' underwent extensive modernization. At the end of 2010, sea trials began, and  ''São Paulo'' had been evaluated by the CIASA (Inspection Commission and Training Advisory). She was expected to rejoin the fleet in late 2013, but suffered another major fire in 2012..ChinaFile:Varyag during refitting.jpg|thumb|China's first aircraft carrier 2 under refit in Dalian Shipbuilding Industry CompanyCurrentOne STOBAR carrier: 2 was originally built as the 57,000 tonne Soviet 0 carrier ''Varyag'' and was later purchased as a stripped hulk by China in 1998 on the pretext of use as a floating casino, then partially rebuilt and towed to China for completion. ''Liaoning'' was commissioned on 25 September 2012, and began service for testing and training. On 24 or 25 November 2012, ''Liaoning'' successfully launched and recovered several Shenyang J-15 jet fighter aircraft.  She is classified as a training ship, intended to allow the navy to practice with carrier usage. On 26 December 2012, the People's Daily reported that it will take four to five years for ''Liaoning'' to reach full capacity, mainly due to training and coordination which will take significant amount of time for Chinese PLA Navy to complete as this is the first aircraft carrier in their possession.  As it is a training ship, ''Liaoning'' is not assigned to any of China's operation fleets.[]EgyptFile:Владивосток - Saint-Nazaire décembre 2014.jpg|thumb|''Vladivostok'' docked at Saint-Nazaire, December 2014FutureEgypt signed a contract with French shipbuilder DCNS to buy two 0 helicopter carriers for approximately 950 million euros. The two ships were originally destined for Russia, but the deal was canceled by France due to Russian involvement in Ukraine. The vessels will be delivered in 2016.FranceFile:Charles De Gaulle (R91) underway 2009.jpg|thumb|right|The aircraft carrier 2 of the French NavyCurrent1 CATOBAR carrier: 2 is a 42,000 tonne nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, commissioned in 2001 and is the flagship of the French Navy (Marine Nationale). The ship carries a complement of Dassault-Breguet Super Étendard, Dassault Rafale|Dassault RafaleM and Grumman E-2 Hawkeye|E;#8209;2C Hawkeye aircraft, EC725 Caracal and AS532 Cougar helicopters for combat search and rescue, as well as modern electronics and Aster missiles. It is a CATOBAR-type carrier that uses two 75m C13‑3 steam catapults of a shorter version of the catapult system installed on the U.S. 0 carriers, one catapult at the bow and one across the front of the landing area.3 amphibious assault ships: 4, 21,500 tonne full deck amphibious assault ships with hospital and well deck.IndiaFile:INS Vikramaditya 13.jpg|thumb|Indian Navy's aircraft carriers 6 and 6 in 2014Current1 STOBAR carrier: Vikramaditya, 45,400 tonnes, modified ''Kiev'' class. The carrier was purchased by India on 20 January 2004 after years of negotiations at a final price of $2.35 billion. The ship successfully completed her sea trials in July 2013 and aviation trials in September 2013. She was formally commissioned on 16 November 2013 at a ceremony held at Severodvinsk, Russia.1 STOVL carrier: Viraat: 28,700 tonne ex-British STOVL converted carrier 6 (launched 1953), purchased in 1986 and commissioned in 1987, scheduled to be decommissioned by 2016.FutureIndia started the construction of a 40,000-tonne,  0 aircraft carrier in 2009.  The new carrier will operate MiG-29K and naval HAL Tejas aircraft along with the Indian-made helicopter HAL Dhruv."iac"The ship will be powered by four gas-turbine engines and will have a range of , carrying 160 officers, 1,400 sailors, and 30 aircraft. The carrier is being constructed by Cochin Shipyard."iac"The ship was launched in August 2013 and is scheduled for commissioning in 2018.A second ''Vikrant''-class carrier Vishal with a displacement of over 65,000 tons is planned and likely to be nuclear-powered with CATOBAR system to launch and recover heavier aircraft and unmanned combat aircraft. The project is in the design phase as of April 2015.ItalyFile:Cavour (550).jpg|thumb|right|The aircraft carrier 2 of the Italian NavyCurrent2 STOVL carriers:* 2: 14,000 tonne Italian STOVL carrier, commissioned in 1985.* 2: 27,000 tonne Italian STOVL carrier designed and built with secondary amphibious assault facilities, commissioned in 2008.JapanFile:Helicopter carrier Hyūga (16DDH).jpg|thumb|Helicopter carrier ''Hyūga''Current3 helicopter carriers:2 s - 19,000 ton (full load) anti-submarine warfare carriers with enhanced command-and-control capabilities allowing them to serve as fleet flagships.1 1 - , 19,500-ton (27,000 tons full load) helicopter carrier, launched August 2013 and commissioned March 2015. This is the largest military ship Japan has had since World War II."Indiastrategic.in"Future''Izumo''s sister ship, ''Kaga'', is under construction and is projected to commission in 2017.RussiaFile:Russian aircraft carrier Kuznetsov.jpg|thumb|Admiral KuznetsovCurrent1 STOBAR carrier: ''Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov'': 55,000 tonne 0 STOBAR aircraft carrier. Launched in 1985 as ''Tbilisi'', renamed and operational from 1995. Without catapults she can launch and recover lightly fueled naval fighters for air defense or anti-ship missions but not heavy conventional bombing strikes.  Officially designated an aircraft carrying cruiser, she is unique in carrying a heavy cruiser's complement of defensive weapons and large P-700 Granit offensive missiles. The P-700 systems will be removed in the coming refit to enlarge her below decks aviation facilities as well as upgrading her defensive systems.South KoreaFile:ROKS Dokdo (LPH 6111).jpg|thumb|right|6, a 1 of the Republic of Korea Navy.CurrentOne 1 18,860 ton full deck amphibious assault ship with hospital and well deck and facilities to serve as fleet flagship.FutureSouth Korea believes it can procure 2 light aircraft carriers by 2036, which will help make the ROKN a blue water navy."defensenews.com"Spain====Current1 STOVL carrier: ''Juan Carlos I'' (L61): 27,000 tonne, Specially designed multipurpose strategic projection ship which can operate as an amphibious assault ship or STOVL carrier depending on mission requirement, has full facilities for both functions including a ski jump ramp, well deck, and vehicle storage area which can be used as additional hangar space, launched in 2008, commissioned 30 September 2010.Thailand====CurrentOne offshore helicopter support ship: Chakri Naruebet helicopter carrier: 11,400 tonne STOVL carrier based on Spanish 2 design. Commissioned in 1997. The AV-8S Matador/Harrier STOVL fighter wing, mostly inoperable by 1999,Carpenter ; Wiencek, Asian Security Handbook 2000, p. 302. was retired from service without replacement in 2006. Ship now used for royal transport, helicopter operations, and as a disaster relief platform.United Kingdom====CurrentOne amphibious assault ship: 6. A 21,750 ton full deck amphibious assault ship based on the Invincible-class aircraft carrier hull but without facilities for fixed wing aviation.FutureThe Royal Navy is constructing two new larger STOVL aircraft carriers, the 4, to replace the three now retired 0 carriers. The ships are 6 and 6."pike_cvf""web.archive.org 7486683"They will be able to operate up to 40 aircraft on peace time operations with a tailored group of up to 50, and will have a displacement of 70,600tonnes. HMS ''Queen Elizabeth'' is projected to commission in 2017 followed by ''Prince of Wales'' in about 2020. The ships are due to become operational starting in 2020."Hansard20120510"Their primary aircraft complement will be made up of F-35B Lightning IIs, and their ship's company will number around 680 with the total complement rising to about 1600 when the air group is embarked. The two ships will be the largest warships ever built for the Royal Navy.United StatesFile:USS Wasp (LHD 1).jpg|thumb|Amphibious assault ship 6Current10 CATOBAR carriers: 4: ten 101,000 ton nuclear-powered supercarriers, the first of which was commissioned in 1975. A ''Nimitz''-class carrier is powered by two nuclear reactors providing steam to four steam turbines and is m long.  The decommissioned supercarrier 2 is being held in reserve until the first of the new 4 comes into service in 2016.[WWAY News Channel 3 "USS Kitty Hawk will have to stay in reserve" published 4 December 2008]Nine Amphibious assault ships:* 4 a class of 45,000 ton amphibious assault ships, although the lead ship in this class does not have a well deck. One ship in service out of a planned 12 ships. Ships of this class can have a secondary mission as a light carrier with 20 AV-8B Harrier II, and in the future the F-35B Lightning II aircraft after unloading their Marine expeditionary unit.* 4 a class of eight 41,000 ton amphibious assault ships, members of this class have been used in wartime in their secondary mission as light carriers with 20 to 25 AV-8Bs after unloading their Marine expeditionary unit.File:USS Gerald R. Ford (CVN-78) on the James River in 2013.JPG|thumb|Gerald R. Ford, a 1FutureThe current US fleet of ''Nimitz''-class carriers will be followed into service (and in some cases replaced) by the 4. It is expected that the ships will be more automated in an effort to reduce the amount of funding required to maintain and operate the vessels. The main new features are implementation of Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System (EMALS) (which replace the old steam catapults) and unmanned aerial vehicles."Aircraft Carriers - CVN"With the deactivation of 6 in December 2012, the U.S. fleet comprises 10 supercarriers. The House Armed Services Seapower subcommittee on 24 July 2007, recommended seven or maybe eight new carriers (one every four years). However, the debate has deepened over budgeting for the $12–14.5billion (plus $12billion for development and research) for the 100,000 ton ''Gerald R. Ford''-class carrier (estimated service 2016) compared to the smaller $2billion 45,000 ton 1s, which are able to deploy squadrons of F-35Bs. The first of this class, 6, is now in active service with another, 6, under construction and 9 more are planned."AFAmag"Aircraft carriers in preservationA few countries have aircraft carriers on display as museum ships. These include:* CV-10 in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina* CV-11 in New York City, New York* CV-12 in Alameda, California* CV-16 in Corpus Christi, Texas* CV-41 in San Diego, California* Kiev in Tianjin, China* Minsk in Shatoujiao, China* R22 (formerly R12) will be preserved in Kakinada, India after decommissioning in 2016.Future and potential museums* CV-63 has a campaign to bring her to Long Beach, California.* CV-67 has a campaign to bring her to Newport, Rhode Island.* LHA-1 has a campaign to bring her to the West Coast of the United States.* R06 currently has three cities bidding to house her as a museum ship.See alsoWar*Airborne aircraft carrier*Carrier-based aircraft*Lily and Clover*Merchant aircraft carrier*Mobile offshore base*Project Habakkuk*Seadrome*Submarine aircraft carrier*Timeline for aircraft carrier service*Unsinkable aircraft carrierRelated lists* List of aircraft carriers* List of aircraft carriers by country* List of aircraft carriers in service* List of aircraft carriers by configuration* List of sunken aircraft carriers* List of Canadian aircraft carriers* List of aircraft carriers of the People's Liberation Army Navy* List of current French aircraft carriers* List of German aircraft carriers* List of aircraft carriers of the Indian Navy* List of Italian aircraft carriers* List of aircraft carriers of the Japanese Navy* List of aircraft carriers of Russia and the Soviet Union* List of active Spanish aircraft carriers* List of aircraft carriers of the Royal Navy* List of seaplane carriers of the Royal Navy* List of escort aircraft carriers of the Royal Navy* List of aircraft carriers of the United States Navy* List of aircraft carrier classes of the United States Navy* List of escort aircraft carriers of the United States Navy* List of amphibious warfare ships* List of carrier-based aircraft* Number of warships in service worldwideReferences30emFurther reading35em* Ader, Clement. ''Military Aviation'', 1909, Edited and translated by Lee Kennett, Air University Press, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, 2003, ISBN 978-1-58566-118-3.* Francillon, René J, ''Tonkin Gulf Yacht Club US Carrier Operations off Vietnam'', (1988) ISBN 978-0-87021-696-1.* Friedman, Norman, ''U.S. Aircraft Carriers: an Illustrated Design History'', Naval Institute Press, 1983. ISBN 978-0-87021-739-5.* Hone, Thomas C., Norman Friedman, and Mark D. Mandeles. "Innovation in Carrier Aviation," ''Naval War College Newport Papers'' (no. 37, 2011), 1–171.* Melhorn, Charles M. ''Two-Block Fox: The Rise of the Aircraft Carrier, 1911-1929'' (Naval Institute Press, 1974)* Nordeen, Lon, ''Air Warfare in the Missile Age'', (1985) ISBN 978-1-58834-083-2*** Till, Geoffrey. "Adopting the Aircraft Carrier: The British, Japanese, and American Case Studies" in Murray, Williamson; Millet, Allan R, eds. (1996). ''Military Innovation in the Interwar Period''. Cambridge University Press.* Trimble, William F. ''Admiral William A. Moffett: Architect of Naval Aviation'' (Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994)* Wadle, Ryan David. ''United States navy fleet problems and the development of carrier aviation, 1929-1933'' PhD dissertation Texas A;M University, 2005.External linksAircraft carriers