The '''Alabama River''', in the U.S. state of Alabama, is formed by the Tallapoosa and Coosa rivers, which unite about 0 north of Montgomery.The river flows west to Selma, then southwest until, about mi from Mobile, it unites with the Tombigbee, forming the Mobile and Tensaw rivers, which discharge into Mobile Bay. ebDescriptionThe course of the Alabama is very meandering. Its width varies from yd, and its depth from 0. Its length as measured by the United States Geological Survey is mi,U.S. Geological Survey. National Hydrography Dataset high-resolution flowline data. [The National Map], accessed April 27, 2011 and by steamboat measurement, mi.The river crosses the richest agricultural and timber districts of the state.  Railways connect it with the mineral regions of north-central Alabama.After the Coosa and Tallapoosa rivers, the principal tributary of the Alabama is the Cahaba River, which is about mi longNHDand joins the Alabama River about mi below Selma. The Alabama River's main tributary, the Coosa River, crosses the mineral region of Alabama and is navigable for light-draft boats from Rome, Georgia, to about mi above Wetumpka (about mi below Rome and mi below Greensport), and from Wetumpka to its junction with the Tallapoosa. The channel of the river has been considerably improved by the federal government.The navigation of the Tallapoosa River –- which has its source in Paulding County, Georgia, and is about mi longNHD-– is prevented by shoals and a  fall at Tallassee, a few miles north of its junction with the Coosa. The Alabama is navigable throughout the year.The river played an important role in the growth of the economy in the region during the 19th century as a source of transportation of goods. The river is still used for transportation of farming produce; however, it is not as important as it once was due to the construction of roads and railways.Discovered in 1712, the Alabama, Coosa, and Tallapoosa rivers were central to the homeland of the Creek Indians before their removal by United States forces to the Indian Territory in the 1830s.Edmund Pettus BridgeThe Edmund Pettus Bridge crosses the Alabama River near Selma.  The bridge was the site of a civil rights march in 1965.Lock and damsThe Alabama River has three lock and dams between Montgomery and the Mobile River.  The Robert F. Henry Lock ; Dam is located at river mile 236.2, the Millers Ferry Lock ; Dam is located at river mile 133.0, and the Claiborne Lock ; Dam is located at river mile 72.5.Courtesy [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Mobile District]GalleryImage:USACE Claiborne Lock and Dam.jpg|Claiborne Lock and Dam on the Alabama River, approximately 0 upriver from Claiborne, Monroe CountyImage:USACE Robert F Henry Lock and Dam.jpg|Robert F. Henry Lock and Dam on the Alabama River, approximately mi east of SelmaImage:Cesam249.jpg|Millers Ferry Lock and Dam on the Alabama River in Wilcox County, approximately mi northwest of CamdenImage:Alabama River RM192 Selma.JPG|Alabama River in Dallas County looking upstream towards Selma.Image:Alabama River at Benton Park.JPG|The Alabama River in Lowndes County as seen from Benton Park in Benton, Alabama.See also*List of Alabama rivers*Tallapoosa River*Coosa River*Mobile River* South Atlantic-Gulf Water Resource RegionReferencesExternal linksAlabama River***