Allegory (category theory)AllegationImage:Filippino Lippi 001.jpg|thumb|300px|''Allegory of Music'' by Filippino Lippi (between 1475 and 1500): The "Allegory of Music" is a popular theme in painting. Lippi uses symbols popular during the High Renaissance, many of which refer to Greek mythology.As a literary device, an ''allegory'' in its most general sense is an extended metaphor. '''Allegory''' has been used widely throughout history in all forms of art, largely because it can readily illustrate complex ideas and concepts in ways that are comprehensible or striking to its viewers, readers, or listeners.Writers or speakers typically use allegories as literary devices or as rhetorical devices that convey hidden meanings through symbolic figures, actions, imagery, and/or events, which together create the moral, spiritual, or political meaning the author wishes to convey.One of the best-known examples of allegory, Plato's Allegory of the Cave, forms a part of his larger work ''The Republic.'' In this allegory, Plato describes a group of people who have lived chained in a cave all of their lives, facing a blank wall (514a-b). The people watch shadows projected on the wall by things passing in front of a fire behind them and begin to ascribe forms to these shadows, using language to identify their world (514c-515a). According to the allegory, the shadows are as close as the prisoners get to viewing reality, until one of them finds his way into the outside world where he sees the actual objects that produced the shadows. He tries to tell the people in the cave of his discovery, but they do not believe him and vehemently resist his efforts to free them so they can see for themselves (516e-518a). This allegory is, on a basic level, about a philosopher who upon finding greater knowledge outside the cave of human understanding, seeks to share it as is his duty, and the foolishness of those who would ignore him because they think themselves educated enough.[Elliott, R. K. (1967). "Socrates and Plato's Cave". Kant-Studien 58 (2): 138.]EtymologyFile:Salvator Rosa (Italian - Allegory of Fortune - Google Art Project.jpg|thumbnail||Salvator Rosa:  ''Allegory of Fortune'', representing Fortuna, the Goddess of luck, with the horn of plentyFirst attested in English in 1382, the word ''allegory'' comes from Latin ''allegoria'', the latinisation of the Greek ἀλληγορία (''allegoria''), "veiled language, figurative,",Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, ''A Greek-English Lexicon'', on Perseus Digital Library which in turn comes from both ἄλλος (''allos''), "another, different", Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, ''A Greek-English Lexicon'', on Perseus Digital Library and ἀγορεύω (''agoreuo''), "to harangue, to speak in the assembly", Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, ''A Greek-English Lexicon'', on Perseus Digital Library which originate from ἀγορά (''agora''), "assembly"., Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, ''A Greek-English Lexicon'', on Perseus Digital LibraryTypesNorthrop Frye discussed what he termed a "continuum of allegory", a spectrum that ranges from what he termed the "naive allegory" of ''The Faerie Queene'', to the more private allegories of modern paradox literature.[Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 1957. Print.] In this perspective, the characters in a "naive" allegory are not fully three-dimensional, for each aspect of their individual personalities and the events that befall them embodies some moral quality or other abstraction; the allegory has been selected first, and the details merely flesh it out.Many ancient religions are based on astrological allegories, that is, allegories of the movement of the sun and the moon as seen from the Earth.Classical allegoryIn classical literature two of the best-known allegories are the Cave in Plato's ''Republic'' (Book VII) and the story of the stomach and its members in the speech of Menenius Agrippa (Livy ii. 32). In Late Antiquity Martianus Capella organized all the information a fifth-century upper-class male needed to know into an allegory of the wedding of Mercury and ''Philologia,'' with the seven liberal arts the young man needed to know as guests.[Capella, Martianus, William Harris. Stahl, Richard Johnson, and E. L. Burge. The Marriage of Philology and Mercury. New York: Columbia UP, 1977. Print.]Other early allegories are found in the Hebrew Bible, such as the extended metaphor in Psalm 80 of the Vine and its impressive spread and growth, representing Israel's conquest and peopling of the Promised Land. Also allegorical is Ezekiel 16 and 17, wherein the capture of that same vine by the mighty Eagle represents Israel's exile to Rome.Medieval allegoryFile:British School 17th century - Portrait of a Lady, Called Elizabeth, Lady Tanfield - Google Art Project.jpg|thumbnail| British School 17th century - Portrait of a Lady, Called Elizabeth, Lady Tanfield. Sometimes the meaning of an allegory can be lost, even if art historians suspect that the artwork is an allegory of some kind.Allegory in the Middle AgesAllegory has an ability to freeze the temporality of a story, while infusing it with a spiritual context. Medieval thinking accepted allegory as having a ''reality'' underlying any rhetorical or fictional uses. The allegory was as true as the facts of surface appearances. Thus, the Papal Bull ''Unam Sanctam'' (1302) presents themes of the unity of Christendom with the pope as its head in which the allegorical details of the metaphors are adduced as facts on which is based a demonstration with the vocabulary of logic: "''Therefore'' of this one and only Church there is one body and one head—not two heads as if it were a monster... If, then, the Greeks or others say that they were not committed to the care of Peter and his successors, they ''necessarily'' confess that they are not of the sheep of Christ." This text also demonstrates the frequent use of allegory in religious texts during the Medieval Period, following the tradition and example of the Bible.In the late 15th century, the enigmatic ''Hypnerotomachia'', with its elaborate woodcut illustrations, shows the influence of themed pageants and masques on contemporary allegorical representation, as humanist dialectic conveyed them.The denial of medieval allegory as found in the 11th-century works of Hugh of St Victor and Edward Topsell's ''Historie of Foure-footed Beastes'' (London, 1607, 1653) and its replacement in the study of nature with methods of categorization and mathematics by such figures as naturalist John Ray and the astronomer Galileo is thought to mark the beginnings of early modern science.Peter Harrison, ''The Bible, Protestantism, and the rise of natural science'', Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-59196-1, pages 1 to 10 ("Introduction")Modern allegorySince meaningful stories are nearly always applicable to larger issues, allegories may be read into many stories which the author may not have recognized. This is allegoresis, or the act of reading a story as an allegory. For instance, many people have suggested that ''The Lord of the Rings'' is an allegory for the World Wars, although Tolkien has dismissed this. Other examples of allegory in popular culture that may or may not have been intended include the works of Bertolt Brecht, and even some works of science fiction and fantasy, such as ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' by C.S. Lewis and ''A Kingdom Far and Clear: The Complete Swan Lake Trilogy'' by Mark Helprin.Poetry and fictionFile:Allegory of Arithmetic - detail.JPG|thumb|''Allegory of Arithmetic'', by Laurent de La Hyre, c. 1650It is important to note that while allegoresis may make discovery of allegory in any work, not every resonant work of modern fiction is allegorical, and some are clearly not intended to be viewed this way. According to Henry Littlefield's 1964 article, L. Frank Baum's ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz'',  may be readily understood as a plot-driven fantasy narrative in an extended fable with talking animals and broadly sketched characters, intended to discuss the politics of the time.[Littlefield, Henry (1964). "The Wizard of Oz: Parable on Populism". American Quarterly 16 (1): 47–58. doi:10.2307/2710826.] Yet, George MacDonald emphasized in 1893 that, "A fairy tale is not an allegory," in direct reference to ''The Wonderful Wizard of Oz''. J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is another example of a well-known work sometimes perceived as allegorical, yet as the author himself once stated, "...I cordially dislike allegory in all of its manifestations and I have always done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence."  While this does not mean his works may not be treated as having allegorical themes, especially when reinterpreted through postmodern sensibilities, it at least suggests that none were conscious in his writings. This further reinforces the idea of forced allegoresis, as allegory is often a matter of interpretation and only sometimes of original artistic intention.Like allegorical stories, allegorical poetry has two meanings – a literal meaning and a symbolic meaning.Some unique specimens of allegory can be found in the following works:*Edmund Spenser ;ndash; ''The Faerie Queene'': The several knights in the poem actually stand for several virtues.*William Shakespeare ;ndash; ''The Tempest'': a fight between good and evil on a deserted island*John Bunyan ;ndash; ''The Pilgrim's Progress'': The journey of the protagonists Christian and Evangelist symbolises the ascension of the soul from earth to Heaven.*Nathaniel Hawthorne ;ndash; ''Young Goodman Brown'': The Devil's Staff symbolises defiance of God. The characters' names, such as ''Goodman'' and ''Faith'', ironically serve as paradox in the conclusion of the story.*Nathaniel Hawthorne ;ndash; ''The Scarlet Letter'': The scarlet letter symbolizes many things. The characters, while developed with interiority, are allegorical in that they represent ways of seeing the world. Symbolism is also prominent.*George Orwell ;ndash; ''Animal Farm'': The pigs stand for political figures of the Russian Revolution.*László Krasznahorkai - ''The Melancholy of Resistance'' and the film ''Werckmeister Harmonies'': It uses a circus to describe an occupying dysfunctional government.*Edgar Allan Poe ;ndash; ''The Masque of the Red Death'': The story can be read as an allegory how no one can evade death.[Roppolo, Joseph Patrick. "Meaning and 'The Masque of the Red Death'", collected in Poe: A Collection of Critical Essays, edited by Robert Regan. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1967. p. 137]ArtSome elaborate and successful specimens of allegory are to be found in the following works, arranged in approximate chronological order:*Ambrogio Lorenzetti ;ndash; ''Allegoria del Buono e Cattivo Governo e loro Effetti in Città e Campagna'' (c. 1338–1339)*Sandro Botticelli ;ndash; ''Primavera'' (c. 1482)*Albrecht Dürer ;ndash; ''Melencolia I'' (1514)*Bronzino ;ndash; ''Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time'' (c. 1545)*The English School's ;ndash; ''"Allegory of Queen Elizabeth"'' (c. 1610)*Artemisia Gentileschi ;ndash; ''Allegory of Inclination'' (c. 1620), ''An Allegory of Peace and the Arts under the English Crown'' (1638); ''Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting'' (c. 1638–39)* The ''Feast of Herod with the Beheading of St John the Baptist'' by Bartholomeus Strobel is also an allegory of Europe in the time of the Thirty Years War, with portraits of many leading political and military figures.*Jan Vermeer ;ndash; ''Allegory of Painting'' (c. 1666)*Marcel Duchamp ;ndash; ''The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even'' (1912-1923)*Graydon Parrish ;ndash; ''The Cycle of Terror and Tragedy'' (2006)*Many statues of Lady Justice: "Such visual representations have raised the question why so many allegories in the history of art, pertaining occupations once reserved for men only, are of female sex."Cäcilia Rentmeister: The Muses, Banned From Their Occupations: Why Are There So Many Allegories Female?  Original Version in German: ''Berufsverbot für die Musen. Warum sind so viele Allegorien weiblich?'' In: Ästhetik und Kommunikation, Nr. 25/1976, S. 92–112. Langfassung in: Frauen und Wissenschaft. Beiträge zur Berliner Sommeruniversität für Frauen, Juli 1976, Berlin 1977, S.258–297. With illustrations.*Damien Hirst ;ndash; ''Verity (sculpture)'' (2012)GalleryVideo gamesVideo games as an art formAs video games have become more widely accepted as a medium for artistic expression, allegorical representations have grown more commonplace.*In Rockstar games third-person crime shooter, ''L.A Noire'' (2011), the fictional protagonist is required to solve the Quarter-Moon Murders by means of Percy B. Shelley allegories left by the murderer who committed the infamous Black Dahlia Murder.*The 2012 game ''Journey'' invokes multiple allegories, such as the our personal life journey, and the Hero's Journey.See also*Allegorical interpretation of the Bible*Allegorical interpretations of Plato*Allegory in the Middle Ages*Allegory in Renaissance literature*Allegorical sculpture*Cultural depictions of Philip II of Spain* Diwan (poetry)*Parable*Semiotics*Theagenes of RhegiumReferences2Further reading*Frye, Northrop (1957) ''Anatomy of Criticism''.*Foucault, Michel (1966) ''The Order of Things''.*External linksAllegories* Allegory in Literary history*[''Electronic Antiquity'', Richard Levis, "Allegory and the ''Eclogues''"] Roman definitions of ''allegoria'' and interpreting Vergil's ''Eclogues''.