Amarantus of AlexandriaAmaranthus (album)talking drumAmaranth (disambiguation)'''''Amaranthus''''', collectively known as '''amaranth''', is a cosmopolitan genus of annual or short-lived perennial plants. Some amaranth species are cultivated as leaf vegetables, pseudocereals, and ornamental plants. Most of the species from ''Amaranthus'' are summer annual weeds and are commonly referred to as pigweed.Bensch et al. (2003). Interference of redroot pigweed (''Amaranthus retroflexus''), Palmer amaranth (''A. palmeri''), and common waterhemp (''A. rudis'') in soybean. Weed Science 51: 37-43.Catkin-like cymes of densely packed flowers grow in summer or autumn. Approximately 60 species are recognized, with inflorescences and foliage ranging from purple and red to green or gold. Members of this genus share many characteristics and uses with members of the closely related genus ''Celosia''."Amaranth" derives from Greek  (''amarantos''), "unfading," with the Greek word for "flower," ἄνθος (''anthos''), factoring into the word's development as "amaranth." The more accurate "amarant" is an archaic variant.TaxonomyFile:Día de muertos.jpg|thumb|Skull shapes made of amaranth and honey for Day of the Dead in MexicoTraditional Mexican candy made with amaranth''Amaranthus'' shows a wide variety of morphological diversity among and even within certain species. Although the family (Amaranthaceae) is distinctive, the genus has few distinguishing characters among the 70 species included. This complicates taxonomy and ''Amaranthus'' has generally been considered among systematists as a "difficult" genus.Formerly, Sauer (1955) classified the genus into two subgenera, differentiating only between monoecious and dioecious species: ''Acnida'' (L.) Aellen ex K.R. Robertson and ''Amaranthus''."Costea"Although this classification was widely accepted, further infrageneric classification was (and still is) needed to differentiate this widely diverse group.Currently, ''Amaranthus'' includes three recognized subgenera and 70 species, although species numbers are questionable due to hybridization and species concepts. Infrageneric classification focuses on inflorescence, flower characters and whether a species is monoecious/dioecious, as in the Sauer (1955) suggested classification."multiple"A modified infrageneric classification of ''Amaranthus'' was published by Mosyakin ; Robertson (1996) and includes three subgenera: ''Acnida'', ''Amaranthus'', and ''Albersia''. The taxonomy is further differentiated by sections within each of the subgenera.SpeciesSpecies include:2* ''Amaranthus acanthochiton'' – greenstripe* ''Amaranthus acutilobus'' –  is a synonym of ''Amaranthus viridis''TPL* ''Amaranthus albus'' – white pigweed, tumble pigweed* ''Amaranthus arenicola'' – sandhill amaranth* ''Amaranthus australis'' – southern amaranth* ''Amaranthus bigelovii'' – Bigelow's amaranth* ''Amaranthus blitoides'' – mat amaranth, prostrate amaranth, prostrate pigweed* ''Amaranthus blitum'' – purple amaranth* ''Amaranthus brownii'' – Brown's amaranth* ''Amaranthus californicus'' – California amaranth, California pigweed* ''Amaranthus cannabinus'' – tidal-marsh amaranth* ''Amaranthus caudatus'' – love-lies-bleeding, pendant amaranth, tassel flower, ''quilete''* ''Amaranthus chihuahuensis'' – Chihuahuan amaranth* ''Amaranthus crassipes'' – spreading amaranth* ''Amaranthus crispus'' – crispleaf amaranth* ''Amaranthus cruentus'' – purple amaranth, red amaranth, Mexican grain amaranth* ''Amaranthus deflexus'' – large-fruit amaranth* ''Amaranthus dubius'' – spleen amaranth, ''khada sag''* ''Amaranthus fimbriatus'' – fringed amaranth, fringed pigweed* ''Amaranthus floridanus'' – Florida amaranth*'' Amaranthus graecizans''* ''Amaranthus greggii'' – Gregg's amaranth* ''Amaranthus hybridus'' – smooth amaranth, smooth pigweed, red amaranth* ''Amaranthus hypochondriacus'' – Prince-of-Wales feather, prince's feather* ''Amaranthus interruptus'' – Australian amaranth* ''Amaranthus minimus''* ''Amaranthus muricatus'' – African amaranth* ''Amaranthus obcordatus'' – Trans-Pecos amaranth* ''Amaranthus palmeri'' – Palmer's amaranth, Palmer pigweed, careless weed* ''Amaranthus polygonoides'' – tropical amaranth* ''Amaranthus powellii'' – green amaranth, Powell amaranth, Powell pigweed* ''Amaranthus pringlei'' – Pringle's amaranth* ''Amaranthus pumilus'' – seaside amaranth* ''Amaranthus retroflexus'' – red-root amaranth, redroot pigweed, common amaranth* ''Amaranthus scleranthoides'' – variously ''Amaranthus sclerantoides''* ''Amaranthus scleropoides'' – bone-bract amaranth* ''Amaranthus spinosus'' – spiny amaranth, prickly amaranth, thorny amaranth* ''Amaranthus standleyanus''* ''Amaranthus thunbergii'' – Thunberg's amaranth* ''Amaranthus torreyi'' – Torrey's amaranth* ''Amaranthus tricolor'' – Joseph's-coat* ''Amaranthus tuberculatus'' – rough-fruit amaranth, tall waterhemp* ''Amaranthus viridis'' – slender amaranth, green amaranth* ''Amaranthus watsonii'' – Watson's amaranth* ''Amaranthus wrightii'' – Wright's amaranthNutrition1 cup (2.4dl, 245g) of ''cooked'' amaranth grain (from approx. 65g raw) provides 251 calories and is an excellent source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of protein, dietary fiber, and some dietary minerals. Amaranth is particularly rich in manganese (105% DV), magnesium (40% DV), iron (29% DV), and selenium (20% DV).Cooked amaranth leaves are an excellent source of vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, manganese and folate.Amaranth contains phytochemicals that may be anti-nutrient factors, such as polyphenols, saponins, tannins and oxalates which are reduced in content and effect by cooking.Human uses=== HistoryKnown to the Aztecs as '''huauhtli''', it is thought to have represented up to 80% of their caloric consumption before the Spanish conquest. Another important use of amaranth throughout Mesoamerica was to prepare ritual drinks and foods.To this day, amaranth grains are toasted much like popcorn and mixed with honey, molasses or chocolate to make a treat called ''alegría'', meaning "joy" in Spanish.Diego Durán described the festivities for Huitzilopochtli, the name of which means "hummingbird of the left side" or "left-handed hummingbird". (Real hummingbirds feed on amaranth flowers.) The Aztec month of Panquetzaliztli (7 December to 26 December) was dedicated to Huitzilopochtli.  People decorated their homes and trees with paper flags; there were ritual races, processions, dances, songs, prayers, and finally human sacrifices. This was one of the more important Aztec festivals, and the people prepared for the whole month. They fasted or ate very little; a statue of the god was made out of amaranth (''huautli'') seeds and honey, and at the end of the month, it was cut into small pieces so everybody could eat a little piece of the god. After the Spanish conquest, cultivation of amaranth was outlawed, while some of the festivities were subsumed into the Christmas celebration.Because of its importance as a symbol of indigenous culture, its gluten-free palatability, ease of cooking, and a protein that is particularly well-suited to human nutritional needs, interest in grain amaranth (especially ''A. cruentus'' and ''A. hypochondriacus'') revived in the 1970s. It was recovered in Mexico from wild varieties and is now commercially cultivated. It is a popular snack sold in Mexico, sometimes mixed with chocolate or puffed rice, and its use has spread to Europe and parts of North America.  Amaranth and quinoa are non-grasses and are called pseudocereals because of their similarities to cereals in flavor and cooking.SeedSeveral species are raised for amaranth "grain" in Asia and the Americas.Ancient amaranth grains still used to this day include the three species, ''Amaranthus caudatus'', ''Amaranthus cruentus'', and ''Amaranthus hypochondriacus''. Although amaranth was cultivated on a large scale in ancient Mexico, Guatemala, and Peru, nowadays it is only cultivated on a small scale there, along with India, China, Nepal, and other tropical countries; thus, there is potential for further cultivation in those countries, as well as in the U.S. In a 1977 article in ''Science'', amaranth was described as "the crop of the future." It has been proposed as an inexpensive native crop that could be cultivated by indigenous people in rural areas for several reasons:# It is easily harvested.# Its raw seeds are a good source of protein.De Macvean ; Pöll (1997). Chapter 8: Ethnobotany. Tropical Tree Seed Manual, USDA Forest Service, edt. J.A Vozzo.Tucker# In cooked and edible forms, amaranth retains adequate content of several dietary minerals.# It is easy to cook.# As befits its weedy life history, amaranth grains grow rapidly and their large seedheads can weigh up to 1 kilogram and contain a half-million small seeds in three cultivated species of amaranth.Tucker, J. (1986). Amaranth: the once and future crop. Bioscience 36(1): 9-13.Seed flourAmaranth seed flour has been evaluated as an additive to wheat flour by food specialists. To determine palatability, different levels of amaranth grain flour were mixed with the wheat flour and baking ingredients (1% salt, 2.5% fat, 1.5% yeast, 10% sugar and 52–74% water), fermented, molded, pan-proofed and baked. The baked products were evaluated for loaf volume, moisture content, color, odor, taste and texture. The amaranth containing products were then compared with bread made from 100% wheat flour. The loaf volume decreased by 40% and the moisture content increased from 22 to 42% with increase in amaranth grain flour. The study found that the sensory scores of the taste, odor, color, and texture decreased with increasing amounts of amaranth. Generally, above 15% amaranth grain flour, there were significant differences in the evaluated sensory qualities and the high amaranth-containing product was found to be of unacceptable palatability to the population sample that evaluated the baked products.Leaves, roots, and stemsAmaranth species are cultivated and consumed as a leaf vegetable in many parts of the world. Four species of ''Amaranthus'' are documented as cultivated vegetables in eastern Asia: ''Amaranthus cruentus'', ''Amaranthus blitum, Amaranthus dubius'', and ''Amaranthus tricolor''.In Indonesia and Malaysia, leaf amaranth is called ''bayam''. In the Philippines, the Ilocano word for the plant is "kalunay"; the Tagalog word for the plant is ''kilitis'' or ''kulitis''. In the state of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in India, it is called ''chaulai'' and is a popular green leafy vegetable (referred to in the class of vegetable preparations called ''saag''). It is called ''chua'' in Kumaun area of Uttarakhand, where it is a popular red-green vegetable. In Karnataka state in India, it is called ''harive'' (ಹರಿವೆ). It is used to prepare curries like'' hulee, palya, majjigay-hulee'', and so on. In the state of Kerala, it is called ''cheera'' and is consumed by stir-frying the leaves with spices and red chillies to make ''cheera thoran''. In Tamil Nadu, it is called ''mulaikkira'' முளைக்கீரை and is regularly consumed as a favourite dish, where the greens are steamed, and mashed, with light seasoning of salt, red chili, and cumin. It is  called ''keerai masial'' (கீரை மசியல்).  In Andhra Pradesh, this leaf is added in preparation of a popular ''dal'' called ''thotakura pappu'' తోట కూర పప్పు (Telugu). In Maharashtra, it is called ''shravani maath'' (literally माठ grown in month of ''Shravan'') and it is available in both red and white colour. In Orissa, it is called ''khada saga'', it is used to prepare ''saga bhaja'', in which the leaf is fried with chili and onions.The root of mature amaranth is a popular vegetable. It is white and cooked with tomatoes or tamarind gravy. It has a milky taste and is alkaline.In China, the leaves and stems are used as a stir-fry vegetable, or in soups, and called 苋菜 (Mandarin Pinyin: xiàncài; Cantonese ''jyutping'': jin6 coi3) with variations in various dialects). Amaranth greens are believed to help enhance eyesight. In Vietnam, it is called ''rau dền'' and is used to make soup. Two species are popular as edible vegetable in Vietnam: ''dền đỏ''- ''Amaranthus tricolor'' and ''dền cơm'' or ''dền trắng''- ''Amaranthus viridis''.A traditional food plant in Africa, amaranth has the potential to improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development and support sustainable land care.In East Africa, amaranth leaf is known in chewa as ''bonongwe'', and in Swahili as ''mchicha'', as ''terere'' in Kikuyu, Meru and Embu; and as ''telele'' in Kamba. In Bantu regions of Uganda, it is known as ''doodo''. It is recommended by some doctors for people having low red blood cell count. It is also known among the Kalenjin as a drought crop (''chepkerta''). In Lingala (spoken in the Congo), it is known as ''lɛngalɛnga'' or ''bítɛkutɛku''. In Nigeria, it is a common vegetable and goes with all Nigerian starch dishes. It is known in Yoruba as ''shoko'' a short form of ''shokoyokoto'' (meaning make the husband fat) or ''arowo jeja'' (meaning "we have money left over for fish"). In the Caribbean, the leaves are called ''bhaji'' in Trinidad and ''callaloo'' in Jamaica, and are sautéed with onions, garlic, and tomatoes, or sometimes used in a soup called pepperpot soup.In Sri Lanka, it is called ''koora thampala''. Sri Lankans cook it and eat it with rice. Fiji Indians call it ''choraiya bhaji''.In Greece, green amaranth (''A. viridis'') is a popular dish called βλήτα, ''vlita'' or ''vleeta''. It is boiled, then served with olive oil and lemon juice like a salad, sometimes alongside fried fish. Greeks stop harvesting the plant (which also grows wild) when it starts to bloom at the end of August.In Brazil, green amaranth was, and to a degree still is, frequently regarded as an invasive species as all other species of amaranth (except the generally imported ''A. caudatus'' cultivar), though some have traditionally appreciated it as a leaf vegetable, under the names of ''caruru'' or ''bredo'', which is consumed cooked, generally accompanying the staple food, rice and beans.DyesThe flowers of the 'Hopi Red Dye' amaranth were used by the Hopi (a tribe in the western United States) as the source of a deep red dye.  Also a synthetic dye was named "amaranth" for its similarity in color to the natural amaranth pigments known as betalains. This synthetic dye is also known as Red No. 2 in North America and E123 in the European Union."The following color additives are not authorized for use in food products in the United States: (1) Amaranth (C.I. 16185, EEC No. E123, formerly certifiable as FD;C red No. 2);"OrnamentalsAmaranthus floweringThe genus also contains several well-known ornamental plants, such as ''Amaranthus caudatus'' (love-lies-bleeding), a vigorous, hardy annual with dark purplish flowers crowded in handsome drooping spikes. Another Indian annual, ''A. hypochondriacus'' (prince's feather), has deeply veined lance-shaped leaves, purple on the under face, and deep crimson flowers densely packed on erect spikes.Amaranths are recorded as food plants for some Lepidoptera (butterfly and moth) species including the nutmeg moth and various case-bearer moths of the genus ''Coleophora'': ''C. amaranthella'', ''C. enchorda'' (feeds exclusively on ''Amaranthus''), ''C. immortalis'' (feeds exclusively on ''Amaranthus''), ''C. lineapulvella'' and ''C. versurella'' (recorded on ''A. spinosus'').EcologyAmaranth weed species have an extended period of germination, rapid growth, and high rates of seed production, "Bensch"and have been causing problems for farmers since the mid-1990s. This is partially due to the reduction in tillage, reduction in herbicidal use and the evolution of herbicidal resistance in several species where herbicides have been applied more often. The following 9 species of ''Amaranthus'' are considered invasive and noxious weeds in the U.S and Canada: ''A. albus'', ''A. blitoides'', ''A. hybridus'', ''A. palmeri'', ''A. powellii'', ''A. retroflexus'', ''A. spinosus'', ''A. tuberculatus'', and ''A. viridis''.[USDA Plant Database. Plants Profile- ''Amaranthus'' L]A new herbicide-resistant strain of ''Amaranthus palmeri'' has appeared; it is glyphosate-resistant and so cannot be killed by herbicides using the chemical. Also, this plant can survive in tough conditions.This could be of particular concern to cotton farmers using glyphosate-resistant cotton. The species ''Amaranthus palmeri'' (Palmer amaranth) causes the greatest reduction in soybean yields and has the potential to reduce yields by 17-68% in field experiments. "Bensch"Palmer amaranth is among the "top five most troublesome weeds" in the southeast of the United States and has already evolved resistances to dinitroaniline herbicides and acetolactate synthase inhibitors. This makes the proper identification of ''Amaranthus'' species at the seedling stage essential for agriculturalists. Proper weed control needs to be applied before the species successfully colonizes in the crop field and causes significant yield reductions.Myth, legend and poetryThe word ''amaranth'' comes from the Greek word ''amaranton'', meaning "unwilting" (from the verb ''marainesthai'' meaning "wilt").  The word was applied to amaranth because it did not soon fade and so symbolized immortality. "Amarant" is a more correct, albeit archaic form, chiefly used in poetry. The current spelling, ''amaranth'', seems to have come from folk etymology that assumed the final syllable derived from the Greek word ''anthos'' ("flower"), common in botanical names.An early Greek fable counted among Aesop's Fables compares the rose to the amaranth to illustrate the difference in fleeting and everlasting beauty:An amaranth planted in a garden near a Rose-Tree, thus addressed it:  "What a lovely flower is the Rose, a favourite alike with Gods and with men.  I envy you your beauty and your perfume."  The Rose replied, "I indeed, dear Amaranth, flourish but for a brief season! If no cruel hand pluck me from my stem, yet I must perish by an early doom.  But thou art immortal and dost never fade, but bloomest for ever in renewed youth.";/blockquote;John Milton's epic ''Paradise Lost'' gives amaranth an illustrious neighbour:Samuel Taylor Coleridge, in ''Work Without Hope'' (1825), also refers to the herb, likely referencing Milton's earlier work. (ll 7-10 excerpted):Percy Bysshe Shelley refers to the herb in his poem "Bereavement" (Lines 13-16 excerpted):In his dialogue "Aesop and Rhodopè", published in 1844, Walter Savage Landor wrote:Joachim du Bellay mentioned the herb in his "A Vow To Heavenly Venus," ca. 1500:In the fourth book of ''Endymion'' (1818), John Keats writes:In ancient Greece, the amaranth (also called chrysanthemum and helichrysum) was sacred to Ephesian Artemis. It allegedly had special healing properties, and, as a symbol of immortality, was used to decorate images of the gods and tombs. In legend, Amarynthus (a form of "Amarantus") was a hunter of Artemis and king of Euboea; in a village of Amarynthus, of which he was the eponymous hero, there was a famous temple of Artemis Amarynthia or Amarysia (Strabo x. 448; Pausan. i. 31, p.5). The Chinese used amaranth widely for its healing chemicals, treating illnesses such as infections, rashes, and migraines. ''"Amarantos"'' is the name of a several-centuries-old popular Greek folk-song:In the poem "The Hound of Heaven" (1893), Francis Thompson compares God's love to "an amaranthine weed..."ImagesFile:Amaranthus caudatus1.jpg|Loves-lies-bleeding (Amaranthus caudatus)File:Amaranthus.hybridus1web.jpg|Green Amaranth (''A. hybridus'')File:Amaranth2.jpg|Seabeach amaranth (''A. pumilus''), an amaranth on the Federal Threatened species ListFile:Illustration Amaranthus retroflexus0.jpg|Red-root Amaranth (''A. retroflexus'') - from Thomé, ''Flora von Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz'' 1885File:Amaranthus.spinosus1web.jpg|Spiny Amaranth (''Amaranthus spinosus'')File:Amaranthus.viridis1web.jpg|Green Amaranth (''Amaranthus viridis'')File:Amaranth sp 2.jpg| Popping Amaranth (Amaranthus sp.)File:Amaranth und WW.jpg|Amaranth grain (left) and wheat (right)File:Travancore Cheera Thoran.JPG|Southern Kerala-style traditional Thoran made with ''Cheera'' (Amaranth) leavesFile:Fepm (8).jpg|Example from ChilpancingoSee also* Ancient grainsReferences33emAdditional reading*Howard, Brian Clark. "?". National Geographic Online, August 12, 2013.* Lenz, ''Botanik der alt. Greich. und Rom.'' Botany of old. (1859)*J. Murr, ''Die Pflanzenwelt in der griech. Mythol.'' Plants in Greek Mythology. (1890)*Fanton M., Fanton J. ''Amaranth'' The Seed Savers' Handbook. (1993)External linksAmaranthusAmaranthus.html