;;The meaning of the word '''American''' in the English language varies according to the historical, geographical, and political context in which it is used. ''American'' is derived from ''America'', a term originally denoting all of the New World (also called ''the Americas''). In some expressions, it retains this Pan-American sense, but its usage has evolved over time and, for various historical reasons, the word came to denote people or things specifically from the United States of America.In modern English, ''Americans'' generally refers to residents of the United States; among native English speakers this usage is almost universal, with any other use of the term requiring specification. [at Bartleby] However, this default use has been the source of complaint by some residents of Latin America who feel that using the term solely for the United States misappropriates it. They argue instead that "American" should be broadened to include people from anywhere in North or South America, not just the United States; these critics admit their proposed usage is uncommon.The word can be used as both a noun and an adjective. In adjectival use, it is generally understood to mean "of or relating to the United States"; for example, "Elvis Presley was an American singer" or "the American President gave a speech today". In noun form, it generally means U.S. citizen or national. The noun is rarely used in American English to refer to people not connected to the United States."Wilson"When used with a grammatical qualifier, the adjective ''American'' can mean "of or relating to the Americas", as in Latin American or Indigenous American. Less frequently, the adjective can take this meaning without a qualifier, as in "American Spanish dialects and pronunciation differ by country", or the name of the Organization of American States. A third use of the term pertains specifically to the indigenous peoples of the Americas, for instance, "In the 16th century, many Americans died from imported diseases during the European conquest".Other languagesFrench, German, Italian, Japanese,}} Hebrew, Arabic, Portuguese, and Russian) for males and ''amerikanka'' () for females}} speakers may use cognates of ''American'' to refer to inhabitants of the Americas or to U.S. nationals. They generally have other terms specific to U.S. nationals, such as the German ''US-Amerikaner'', French '''', Japanese , Arabic '''' ( as opposed to '''' ), and Italian ''statunitense''. These specific terms may be less common than the term ''American''.french-etatsunienIn French, '''', '''' or '''', from '''' ("United States of America"), is a rarely used word that distinguishes U.S. things and persons from the adjective '''', which denotes persons and things from the United States, but may also refer to "the Americas".french-etatsunienLikewise, German's use of ''U.S.-amerikanisch'' and ''U.S.-Amerikaner''de-dictobserve said cultural distinction, solely denoting U.S. things and people. Note that these are "politically correct" terms and that in normal parlance, the adjective "American" and its direct cognates are almost always used unless the context does not render the nationality of the person clear.This differentiation is prevalent in German-speaking countries, as indicated by the style manual of the ''Neue Zürcher Zeitung'' (one of the leading German-language newspapers in Switzerland) which dismisses the term ''U.S.-amerikanisch'' as both ′unnecessary′ and ′artificial′ and recommends replacing it with ''amerikanisch''.''Vademecum. Der sprachlich-technische Leitfaden der «Neuen Zürcher Zeitung»'', 13th edition. Verlag Neue Zürcher Zeitung, Zürich 2013, p. 102, s. v. ''US-amerikanisch''. The respective guidelines of the foreign ministries of Austria, Germany and Switzerland all prescribe ''Amerikaner'' and ''amerikanisch'' in reference to the United States for official usage, making no mention of ''U.S.-Amerikaner'' or ''U.S.-amerikanisch''.Eidgenössisches Departement für auswärtige Angelegenheiten: [„Liste der Staatenbezeichnungen“]; Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale Angelegenheiten: [„Liste der Staatennamen und deren Ableitungen in den vom Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale Angelegenheiten verwendeten Formen“]; Auswärtiges Amt:Portuguese has ''americano'', denoting both a person or thing from the Americas and a U.S. national. For referring specifically to a U.S. national and things, some words used are ''estadunidense'' (also spelled ''estado-unidense'', "United States person"), from '''', and ''ianque'' ("Yankee")—both usages exist in Brazil, but are uncommon in Portugal—but the term most often used, and the only one in Portugal, is ''norte-americano'', even though it could, as with its Spanish equivalent, apply to Canadians, Mexicans, etc. as well.In Spanish, ''americano'' denotes geographic and cultural origin in the New World, as well as (infrequently) a U.S. citizen; the more common term is '''' ("United States person"), which derives from '''' ("United States of America"). The Spanish term ''norteamericano'' ("North American") is frequently used to refer things and persons from the United States, but this term can also denote people and things from Canada, Mexico, and the rest of North America.In other languages, however, there is no possibility for confusion. For example, the Chinese word for "U.S. national '''' ()'' is the Standard Mandarin pronunciation.}} is derived from a word for the United States, '''', where '''' is an abbreviation for ''Yàměilìjiā'' ("America") and '''' is "country". The name for the American continent is '''', from '''' plus '''' ("continent"). Thus, a '''' is an American in the continent sense, and a '''' is an American in the U.S. sense.'' ("United States") is written as , '''' ("America the continent") is written as , '''' ("country") is written as , and '''' ("continent") is written as .zh-dict-uszh-dict-americazh-dict-countryzh-dict-continent}}Conversely, in Czech, there is no possibility for disambiguation. '':wiktionary:Američan|Američan'' (m.) and '':wiktionary:Američanka|američanka'' (f.) can refer to persons from the United States or from the continent of America, and there is no specific word capable of distinguishing the two meanings. For this reason, the latter meaning is very rarely used, and word ''američan(ka)'' is used almost exclusively to refer to persons from the US. The usage is exactly parallel to the English word.Korean and Vietnamese also use unambiguous terms, with Korean having ''Migug'' () for the country versus ''Amerika'' () for the continent, and Vietnamese having '''' for the country versus '''' for the continent. Japanese has such terms as well (''beikoku(jin)'' [ versus '''' []), but they are found more in newspaper headlines than in speech, where ''amerikajin'' predominates.In Swahili, ''Marekani'' means specifically the United States, and ''Mwamarekani'' is a U.S. national, whereas the international form ''Amerika'' refers to the continent, and ''Mwaamerika'' would be an inhabitants thereof. Likewise, the Esperanto word ''Ameriko'' refers to the continent. For the country there is the term ''Usono''. Thus, a citizen of the United States is an ''usonano'', whereas an ''amerikano'' is an inhabitant of the Americas.eoIn Hungarian the term amerikai (American) refers to a person or a thing from the United States.HistoryBritish map of the Americas in 1744.The name ''America'' was coined by Martin Waldseemüller  from ''Americus Vespucius'', the Latinized version of the name of Amerigo Vespucci (1454–1512), the Italian explorer who mapped South America's east coast and the Caribbean Sea in the early 16th century. Later, Vespucci's published letters were the basis of Waldseemüller map|Waldseemüller's 1507 map, which is the first usage of ''America''. The adjective ''American'' subsequently denoted the New World.16th-century European usage of ''American'' denoted the native inhabitants of the New World.  The earliest recorded use of this term in English is in Thomas Hacket's 1568 translation of André Thévet's book ''France Antarctique''; Thévet himself had referred to the natives as ''Ameriques''."OED"In the following century, the term was extended to European settlers and their descendants in the Americas. The earliest recorded use of this term in English dates to 1648, in Thomas Gage's ''The English-American: A New Survet of the West Indies''."OED"In English, ''American'' was used especially for people in the British America, and came to be applied to citizens of the United States after that country was formed in 1776."OED"The Declaration of Independence refers to "[the] unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America" adopted by the "Representatives of the united States of America" on July 4, 1776. The official name of the country was established on November 15, 1777, when the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, the first of which says, "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America'". The Articles further state:In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress. Done at Philadelphia in the State of Pennsylvania the ninth day of July in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-Eight, and in the Third Year of the independence of America.The term ''American'', however, applied as a noun to the citizens of the newly independent colonies, was not yet in general usage. In fact, it was British officials who first called the colonists “Americans”. When the drafters of the ''Declaration'' — Thomas Jefferson from Virginia, for example, or John Adams from Massachusetts — talked about “my country”, they meant Virginia or Massachusetts, respectively. This situation was changed by the Revolution and the impulse toward nationalism.Wood, Gordon S. (2015), , ''New York Review of Books'', July 9 issue.  Jefferson, newly elected president in May 1801 wrote, "I am sure the measures I mean to pursue are such as would in their nature be approved by every American who can emerge from preconceived prejudices; as for those who cannot, we must take care of them as of the sick in our hospitals. The medicine of time and fact may cure some of them."In ''The Federalist'' Papers (1787–88), Alexander Hamilton and James Madison used the adjective ''American'' with two different meanings: one political and one geographic; "the American republic" in Federalist No. 51 and in Federalist No. 70, and, in Federalist No. 24, Hamilton used ''American'' to denote the lands beyond the U.S.'s political borders.Early official U.S. documents show inconsistent usage; the 1778 Treaty of Alliance with France used "the United States of North America" in the first sentence, then "the said United States" afterwards; "the United States of America" and "the United States of North America" derive from "the United Colonies of America" and "the United Colonies of North America". The Treaty of Peace and Amity of September 5, 1795 between the United States and the Barbary States contains the usages "the United States of North America", "citizens of the United States", and "American Citizens".File:Washington's Farewell Address.jpg|thumb|''Washington's Farewell Address'' (1796)U.S. President George Washington, in his 1796 ''Farewell Address'', declaimed that "The name of American, which belongs to you in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appellation."wikisource:Washington's Farewell Address Political scientist Virginia L. Arbery notes that, in his ''Farewell Address'': "...Washington invites his fellow citizens to view themselves now as Americans who, out of their love for the truth of liberty, have replaced their maiden names (Virginians, South Carolinians, New Yorkers, etc.) with that of “American”. Get rid of, he urges, “any appellation derived from local discriminations.” By defining himself as an American rather than as a Virginian, Washington set the national standard for all citizens. "Over and over, Washington said that America must be something set apart. As he put it to Patrick Henry, 'In a word, I want an ''American'' character, that the powers of Europe may be convinced we act for ''ourselves'' and not for ''others''.'"Arbery, Virginia L. (1999), "Washington's Farewell Address and the Form of the American Regime"; In: Gary L. Gregg II and Matthew Spalding, ''Patriot Sage: George Washington and the American Political Tradition'', pp. 204, 206. ;/blockquote;As the historian Garry Wills has noted: "This was a theme dear to Washington. He wrote to Timothy Pickering that the nation 'must never forget that we are Americans; the remembrance of which will convince us we ought not to be French or English'." Washington's countrymen subsequently embraced his exhortation with notable enthusiasm.This semantic divergence among North American anglophones, however, remained largely unknown in the Spanish-American colonies. In 1801, the document titled ''Letter to American Spaniards''—published in French (1799), in Spanish (1801), and in English (1808)—might have influenced Venezuela's Act of Independence and its 1811 constitution.The Latter-day Saints' Articles of Faith refer to the American continent as where they are to build Zion. The Old Catholic Encyclopedia's usage of ''America'' is as "the Western Continent or the New World". It discusses American republics, ranging from the U.S. toCommon short forms and abbreviations are the ''United States'', the ''U.S.'', the ''U.S.A.'', and ''America''; colloquial versions include the ''U.S. of A.'' and ''the States''. The term ''Columbia'' (from the Columbus surname) was a popular name for the U.S. and for the entire geographic Americas; its usage is present today in the District of Columbia's name. Moreover, the womanly personification of Columbia appears in some official documents, including editions of the U.S. dollar.Usage at the United NationsUse of the term ''American'' for U.S. nationals is common at the United Nations, and financial markets in the United States are referred to as "American financial markets".''American Samoa'' is a recognized territorial name at the United Nations.Cultural viewsSpain and Latin AmericaThe use of ''American'' as a national demonym for U.S. nationals is challenged, primarily by Latin Americans."Mencken"Spanish speakers in Spain and Latin America use the term ''estadounidense'' to refer to people and things from the United States (from ''Estados Unidos''), while ''americano'' refers to the continent as a whole.rae-americano[Original:] "1. adj. Natural de los Estados Unidos de América." Up to and including the 1992 edition, the '''', published by the Real Academia Española, did not include the United States definition in the entry for ''americano''; this was added in the 2001 edition.rae-americanoTo access, click the magnifying glass in the upper left-hand corner. In the field titled "Lema", type "americano"; for the "Resultados" radio buttons, select "Diccionario"; in the field in the selection field for "Diccionarios", make sure that "1992 Academica Usual" is selected. Then click "Buscar". The Real Academia Española advised against using ''americanos'' exclusively for U.S. nationals:rae-estadosunidosCanadaModern Canadians typically refer to people from the United States as ''Americans'', though they seldom refer to the United States as ''America''; they use the terms ''the United States'', ''the U.S.'', or (informally) ''the States'' instead. Canadians rarely apply the term ''American'' to themselves – some Canadians resent either being referred to as Americans because of mistaken assumptions that they are U.S. citizens or others' inability, particularly of those overseas, to distinguish Canadian from American accents."oxfcdn"Some Canadians have protested the use of ''American'' as a national demonym. People of U.S. ethnic origin in Canada are categorized as "Other North American origins" by Statistics Canada for purposes of census counts (as opposed to "Canadian").Portugal and BrazilGenerally, ''americano'' denotes "U.S. citizen" in Portugal.pt-americanoUsage of ''americano'' to exclusively denote people and things of the U.S. is discouraged by the Academia das Ciências de Lisboa|Lisbon Academy of Sciences, because the specific word ''estado-unidense'' (also ''estadunidense'') clearly denotes a person from the United States. The term currently used by the Portuguese press is ''norte-americano''.In Brazil, the term ''americano'' is used to address both that which pertains to the American continent and, in current speech, that which pertains to the U.S.; the particular meaning is deduced from context. Alternatively, the term ''norte-americano'' ("North American") is also used in more informal contexts, while ''estadunidense'' (of the U.S.) is the preferred form in academia. Use of the three terms is common in schools, government, and media. The term '''' is used almost exclusively for the continent, and the U.S. is called ''Estados Unidos'' ("United States") or '''' ("United States of America"), often abbreviated ''EUA''.The Getting Through Customs website advises business travelers not to use "in America" as a U.S. reference when conducting business in Brazil.In other contexts"American" in the 1994 ''Associated Press Stylebook'' was defined as, "An acceptable description for a resident of the United States. It also may be applied to any resident or citizen of nations in North or South America." Elsewhere, the ''AP Stylebook'' indicates that "United States" must "be spelled out when used as a noun. Use U.S. (no space) only as an adjective."The entry for "America" in ''The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage'' from 1999 reads:Media releases from the Pope and Holy See frequently use "America" to refer to the United States, and "American" to denote something or someone from the United States.International lawAt least one international law uses ''U.S. citizen'' in defining a citizen of the United States rather than ''American citizen''; for example, the English version of the North American Free Trade Agreement includes:Many international treaties use the terms ''American'' and ''American citizen'':* 1796 – The treaty between the United States and the Dey of the Regency of Algiers on March 7, 1796 protected "American citizens".* 1806 – The Louisiana Purchase Treaty between France and United States referred to "American citizens".* 1825 – The treaty between the United States and the Cheyenne tribe refers to "American citizen"s.* 1848 – The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo between Mexico and the U.S. uses "American Government" to refer to the United States, and "American tribunals" to refer to U.S. courts.* 1858 – The Treaty of Amity and Commerce between the United States and Japan protected "American citizens" and also used "American" in other contexts.* 1898 – The Treaty of Paris ending the Spanish–American War, known in Spanish as the '''' ("Spain–United States War") uses "American" in reference to United States troops.* 1966 – The Treaty of Amity and Economic Relations (Thailand–United States)|United States–Thailand Treaty of Amity protects "Americans" and "American corporations".U.S. commercial regulationProducts that are labeled, advertised, and marketed in the U.S. as "Made in the USA" must be, as set by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), "all or virtually all made in the U.S." The FTC, to prevent deception of customers and unfair competition, considers an unqualified claim of "American Made" to expressly claim exclusive manufacture in the U.S: "The FTC Act gives the Commission the power to bring law enforcement actions against false or misleading claims that a product is of U.S. origin."AlternativesNames for United States citizensThere are a number of alternatives to the demonym ''American'' as a citizen of the United States that do not simultaneously mean any inhabitant of the Americas. One uncommon alternative is ''Usonian'', which usually describes a certain style of residential architecture designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Other alternatives have also surfaced, but most have fallen into disuse and obscurity. ''Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage'' says:Nevertheless, no alternative to ''American'' is common.WilsonSee alsoUnited States* Americans* Americas (terminology)NotesReferences30emWorks cited***External linksAmerican*