The '''ampere''' (SI unit symbol: A), often shortened to "amp",SI supports only the use of symbols and deprecates the use of abbreviations for units. is the SI unit of electric current[Base unit definitions: Ampere]. Physics.nist.gov. Retrieved on 2010-09-28.  (dimension symbol: I) and is one of the sevenThe other six are the metre, kelvin, second, mole, candela, and kilogram SI base units. It is named after André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836), French mathematician and physicist, considered the father of electrodynamics.The ampere is equivalent to one coulomb (roughly  times the elementary charge) per second. Amperes are used to express flow rate of electric charge. For any point experiencing a current, if the number of charged particles passing through it;mdash; or the charge on the particles passing through it;mdash; is increased, the amperes of current at that point will proportionately increase.The ampere should not be confused with the coulomb (also called "ampere-second") or the ampere-hour (A⋅h). The ampere is a unit of current, the amount of charge transiting per unit time, and the coulomb is a unit of charge. When SI units are used, constant, instantaneous and average current are expressed in amperes (as in "the charging current is 1.2A") and the charge accumulated, or passed through a circuit over a period of time is expressed in coulombs (as in "the battery charge is "). The relation of the ampere to the coulomb is the same as that of the watt to the joule, and that of metre per second to metre.DefinitionIllustration of the definition of the ampere unitAmpère's force law. states that there is an attractive or repulsive force between two parallel wires carrying an electric current. This force is used in the formal definition of the ampere, which states that the ampere is the constant current that will produce an attractive force of 2;times;10−7 newtons per metre of length between two straight, parallel conductors of infinite length and negligible circular cross section placed one metre apart in a vacuum."BIPMdefinition".The SI unit of charge, the coulomb, "is the quantity of electricity carried in 1 second by a current of 1 ampere".. Conversely, a current of one ampere is one coulomb of charge going past a given point per second::\rm 1\ A=1\tfrac C s.In general, charge ''Q'' is determined by steady current ''I'' flowing for a time ''t'' as .HistoryThe ampere was originally defined as one tenth of the unit of electric current in the centimetre–gram–second system of units; that unit, now known as the abampere, was defined as the amount of current that generates a force of two dynes per centimetre of length between two wires one centimetre apart.. The size of the unit was chosen so that the units derived from it in the MKSA system would be conveniently sized.The "international ampere" was an early realization of the ampere, defined as the current that would deposit  of silver per second from a silver nitrate solution. Later, more accurate measurements revealed that this current is .RealizationThe standard ampere is most accurately realized using a watt balance, but is in practice maintained via Ohm's law from the units of electromotive force and resistance, the volt and the ohm, since the latter two can be tied to physical phenomena that are relatively easy to reproduce, the Josephson junction and the quantum Hall effect, respectively..At present, techniques to establish the realization of an ampere have a relative uncertainty of approximately a few parts in 107, and involve realizations of the watt, the ohm and the volt."Electrical quantities"Proposed future definitionNew SI definitionsRather than a definition in terms of the force between two current-carrying wires, it has been proposed to define the ampere in terms of the rate of flow of elementary charges. "Beyond"Since a coulomb is approximately equal to  elementary charges (such as electrons), one ampere is approximately equivalent to  elementary charges moving past a boundary in one second, or the reciprocal of the value of the elementary charges in coulombs.. The proposed change would define 1A as being the current in the direction of flow of a particular number of elementary charges per second. In 2005, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) agreed to study the proposed change. The new definition was discussed at the 25th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) in 2014 but for the time being was not adopted.Everyday examplesOrders of magnitude (current)The current drawn by typical constant-voltage energy distribution systems is usually dictated by the power (watts) consumed by the system and the operating voltage. For this reason the examples given below are grouped by voltage level.Portable devices*Hearing aid (typically 1mW at 1.4V): 0.7mAMotor vehicles – 12 V DCA typical motor vehicle has a 12V battery. The various accessories that are powered by the battery might include:*Instrument panel light (typically 2W): 166mA.*Headlights (typically 60W): 5A each.*Starter motor (typically 1–2kW): 80–160ANorth American domestic supply – 120 V ACMost United States, Canada and Mexico domestic power suppliers run at 120V.Household circuit breakers typically provide a maximum of 15A or 20A of current to a given set of outlets.*22-inch/56-centimeter portable television (35W): 290mA*Tungsten light bulb (60–100W): 500–830mA*Toaster, kettle (1.5kW): 12.5A*Hair dryer (1.8kW): 15AEuropean ; Commonwealth domestic supply – 230-240 V ACMost European domestic power supplies run at 230V, and most Commonwealth domestic power supplies run at 240V. For the same amount of power (in watts), the current drawn by a particular European or Commonwealth appliance (in Europe or a Commonwealth country) will be less than for an equivalent North American appliance.The formula for power is given by:P(t) = I(t) \cdot V(t) \,so it follows that if the voltage is doubled and the power remains the same, the current will be halved. Typical circuit breakers will provide 16A.The current drawn by a number of typical appliances are:*22-inch/56-centimeter portable television (35W): 145–150mA*Tungsten light bulb (60–100W): 240–450mA*Compact fluorescent lamp (11–30W): 56–112mA*Toaster, kettle (2kW): 9A*Immersion heater (4.6kW): 19–20ASee also* Ammeter* Ampacity (current-carrying capacity)* Electric current* Electric shock* Hydraulic analogy* Magnetic constant* Orders of magnitude (current)NotesReferencesExternal links