the mountain range in South AmericaThe '''Andes''' are the longest continental mountain range in the world. They are a continual range of highlands along the western coast of South America. This range is about  long, about  wide (widest between 18th parallel south|18° south and 20th parallel south|20° south latitude), and of an average height of about . The Andes extend from north to south through seven South American countries: Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Argentina.Along their length, the Andes are split into several ranges, which are separated by intermediate depressions. The Andes are the location of several high plateaux – some of which host major cities, such as Quito, Bogotá, Arequipa, Medellín, Sucre, Mérida, Mérida|Mérida and La Paz. The Altiplano plateau is the world's second-highest after the Tibetan plateau. These ranges are in turn grouped into three major divisions based on climate: the Tropical Andes, the Dry Andes, and the Wet Andes.The Andes are the world's highest mountain range outside of Asia. The highest mountain outside Asia, Mount Aconcagua, rises to an elevation of about  above sea level. The peak of Chimborazo in the Ecuadorean Andes is farther from the Earth's center than any other location on the Earth's surface, due to the equatorial bulge resulting from the Earth's rotation. The world's highest volcanoes are in the Andes, including Ojos del Salado on the Chile-Argentina border which rises to .File:Cono de Arita, Salta. (Argentina).jpg|thumb|"Cono de Arita" in the Puna de Atacama, Salta (Argentina).Aerial view of Aconcagua.EtymologyThe etymology of the word ''Andes'' has been debated. The majority consensus is that it derives from the Quechua word ''anti'', which means "east"Teofilo Laime Ajacopa, Diccionario Bilingüe Iskay simipi yuyayk'ancha, La Paz, 2007 (Quechua-Spanish dictionary) as in ''Antisuyu'' (Quechua for "east region"),laimeone of the four regions of the Inca Empire.GeographyFile:ARG-2016-Aerial-Tierra del Fuego (Ushuaia)–Valle Carbajal 01.jpg|thumb|Aerial view of Valle Carbajal in the Fuegian Andes.The Andes can be divided into three sections:# The Southern Andes (south of Llullaillaco) in Argentina and Chile;# The Central Andes in Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia# The Northern Andes (north of the Nudo de Pasto) in Venezuela and Colombia which consist of three parallel ranges, the western, central, and eastern ranges. (The cordillera occidental, central, and oriental.)In the northern part of the Andes, the isolated Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta range is often considered to be part of the Andes. The term ''cordillera'' comes from the Spanish word "cordel", meaning "rope". The Andes range is about  wide throughout its length, except in the Bolivian flexure where it is about 0 wide. The Leeward Antilles islands Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao, which lie in the Caribbean Sea off the coast of Venezuela, were thought to represent the submerged peaks of the extreme northern edge of the Andes range, but ongoing geological studies indicate that such a simplification does not do justice to the complex tectonic boundary between the South American and Caribbean plates.Geology;/div;The Andes are a Mesozoic–Tertiary orogenic belt of mountains along the Pacific Ring of Fire, a zone of volcanic activity that encompasses the Pacific rim of the Americas as well as the Asia-Pacific region. The Andes are the result of plate tectonics processes, caused by the subduction of oceanic crust beneath the South American plate. The main cause of the rise of the Andes is the compression of the western rim of the South American Plate due to the subduction of the Nazca Plate and the Antarctic Plate. To the east, the Andes range is bounded by several sedimentary basins, such as Orinoco, Amazon Basin, Madre de Dios and Gran Chaco, that separate the Andes from the ancient cratons in eastern South America. In the south, the Andes share a long boundary with the former Patagonia Terrane. To the west, the Andes end at the Pacific Ocean, although the Peru-Chile trench can be considered their ultimate western limit. From a geographical approach, the Andes are considered to have their western boundaries marked by the appearance of coastal lowlands and a less rugged topography. The Andes Mountains also contain large quantities of iron ore located in many mountains within the range.The Andean orogen has a series of bends or oroclines. The Bolivian Orocline is a seaward concave bending in the coast of South America and the Andes Mountains at about 18° S.Isacks1988At this point the orientation of the Andes turns from Northwest in Peru to South in Chile and Argentina.Kley1999The Andean segment north and south of the orocline have been rotated 15° to 20° counter clockwise and clockwise respectively.Kley1999The Bolivian Orocline area overlaps with the area of maximum width of the Altiplano Plateau and according to Isacks (1988) the orocline is related to crustal shortening. The specific point at 18° S where the coastline bends is known as the "Arica Elbow". Further south lies the Maipo Orocline or Maipo Transition Zone located between 30° S and 38°S in the with a break in trend at 33° S. Near the southern tip of the Andes lies the Patagonian orocline.OrogenyAndean orogenyThe western rim of the South American Plate has been the place of several pre-Andean orogenies since at least the late Proterozoic and early Paleozoic, when several terranes and microcontinents collided and amalgamated with the ancient cratons of eastern South America, by then the South American part of Gondwana.The formation of the modern Andes began with the events of the Triassic when Pangaea began to break up and several rifts developed. It continued through the Jurassic Period. It was during the Cretaceous Period that the Andes began to take their present form, by the uplifting, faulting and folding of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks of the ancient cratons to the east. The rise of the Andes has not been constant and different regions have had different degrees of tectonic stress, uplift, and erosion.Tectonic forces above the subduction zone along the entire west coast of South America where the Nazca Plate and a part of the Antarctic Plate are sliding beneath the South American Plate continue to produce an ongoing orogenic event resulting in minor to major earthquakes and volcanic eruptions to this day. In the extreme south a major transform fault separates Tierra del Fuego from the small Scotia Plate. Across the  wide Drake Passage lie the mountains of the Antarctic Peninsula south of the Scotia Plate which appear to be a continuation of the Andes chain.The regions immediately east of the Andes experience a series of changes resulting from the Andean orogeny. Parts of the Sunsás orogeny|Sunsás Orogen in Amazonian craton disappeared from the surface of earth being overrided by the Andes.The Sierras de Córdoba, where the effects of the ancient Pampean orogeny can be observed, owe their modern uplift and relief to the Andean orogeny in the Tertiary. Further south in southern Patagonia the onset of the Andean orogeny caused the Magallanes Basin to evolve from being an extensional back-arc basin in the Mesozoic to being a compressional foreland basin in the Cenozoic.VolcanismAndean Volcanic BeltRift valley near Quilotoa, Ecuador.Astronaut photograph with the high plains of the Andes Mountains in the foreground, with a line of young volcanoes facing the much lower Atacama Desert.The Andes range has many active volcanoes, which are distributed in four volcanic zones separated by areas of inactivity. The Andean volcanism is a result of subduction of the Nazca Plate and Antarctic Plate underneath the South American Plate. The belt is subdivided into four main volcanic zones that are separated from each other by volcanic gaps. The volcanoes of the belt are diverse in terms of activity style, products and morphology. While some differences can be explained by which volcanic zone a volcano belongs to, there are significant differences inside volcanic zones and even between neighbouring volcanoes. Despite being a type location for calc-alkalic and subduction volcanism, the Andean Volcanic Belt has a large range of volcano-tectonic settings, such as rift systems and extensional zones, transpersonal faults, subduction of mid-ocean ridges and seamount chains apart from a large range of crustal thicknesses and magma ascent paths, and different amount of crustal assimilations.Ore deposits and evaporitesThe Andes Mountains host large ore and salt deposits and some of their eastern fold and thrust belt acts as traps for commercially exploitable amounts of hydrocarbons. In the forelands of the Atacama desert some of the largest porphyry copper mineralizations occurs making Chile and Peru the first and second largest exporters of copper in the world. Porphyry copper in the western slopes of the Andes has been generated by hydrothermal fluids (mostly water) during the cooling of plutons or volcanic systems. The porphyry mineralization further benefited from the dry climate that let them largely out of the disturbing actions of meteoric water. The dry climate in the central western Andes has also led to the creation of extensive saltpeter deposits which were extensively mined until the invention of synthetic nitrates. Yet another result of the dry climate are the salars of Atacama and Uyuni, the first one being the largest source of lithium today and the second the world's largest reserve of the element. Early Mesozoic and Neogene plutonism in Bolivia's Cordillera Central created the Bolivian tin belt as well as the famous, now depleted, deposits of Cerro Rico de Potosí.Climate and hydrologyWet AndesCentral AndesBolivian AndesThe climate in the Andes varies greatly depending on latitude, altitude, and proximity to the sea. Temperature, atmospheric pressure and humidity decrease in higher elevations. The southern section is rainy and cool, the central section is dry. The northern Andes are typically rainy and warm, with an average temperature of 0 in Colombia. The climate is known to change drastically in rather short distances. Rainforests exist just miles away from the snow-covered peak Cotopaxi. The mountains have a large effect on the temperatures of nearby areas. The snow line depends on the location. It is at between  in the tropical Ecuadorian, Colombian, Venezuelan, and northern Peruvian Andes, rising to  in the drier mountains of southern Peru south to northern Chile south to about 30°S, then descending to  on Aconcagua at 32°S,  at 40°S,  at 50°S, and only  in Tierra del Fuego at 55°S; from 50°S, several of the larger glaciers descend to sea level.The Andes of Chile and Argentina can be divided in two climatic and glaciological zones; the Dry Andes and the Wet Andes. Since the Dry Andes extend from the latitudes of Atacama Desert to the area of Maule River, precipitation is more sporadic and there are strong temperature oscillations. The line of equilibrium may shift drastically over short periods of time, leaving a whole glacier in the ablation area or in the accumulation area.In the high Andes of central Chile and Mendoza Province, rock glaciers are larger and more common than glaciers; this is due to the high exposure to solar radiation.Jan-Christoph Otto, Joachim Götz, Markus Keuschnig, Ingo Hartmeyer, Dario Trombotto, and Lothar Schrott (2010). Geomorphological and geophysical investigation of a complex rock glacier system - Morenas Coloradas valley (Cordon del Plata, Mendoza, Argentina)Though precipitation increases with the height, there are semiarid conditions in the nearly 7000m towering highest mountains of the Andes. This dry steppe climate is considered to be typical of the subtropical position at 32-34° S. The valley bottoms have no woods, just dwarf scrub. The largest glaciers, as e.g. the Plomo glacier and the Horcones glaciers do not even reach 10km in length and have an only insignificant ice thickness. At glacial times, however, c. 20 000 years ago, the glaciers were over ten times longer. On the east side of this section of the Mendozina Andes they flowed down to 2060m and on the west side to c. 1220m asl.Kuhle, M. (2011): The High-Glacial (Last Glacial Maximum) Glacier Cover of the Aconcagua Group and Adjacent Massifs in the Mendoza Andes (South America) with a Closer Look at Further Empirical Evidence. Development in Quaternary Science, Vol. 15 (Quaternary Glaciation - Extent and Chronology, A Closer Look, Eds: Ehlers, J.; Gibbard, P.L.; Hughes, P.D.), 735-738. (Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam).Brüggen, J. (1929): Zur Glazialgeologie der chilenischen Anden. Geol. Rundsch. 20, 1–35, Berlin. The massifs of Cerro Aconcagua (6,961m), Cerro Tupungato (6,550m) and Nevado Juncal (6,110m) are tens of kilometres away from each other and were connected by a joint ice stream network. The Andes' dendritic glacier arms, i.e. components of valley glaciers, were up to 112.5km long, over 1020, i.e. 1250m thick and overspanned a vertical distance of 5150 altitude metres. The climatic glacier snowline (ELA) was lowered from currently 4600m to 3200m at glacial times."Kuhle, M. 2011"Kuhle, M. (1984): Spuren hocheiszeitlicher Gletscherbedeckung in der Aconcagua-Gruppe (32–33° S). In: Zentralblatt für Geologie und Paläontologie Teil 1 11/12, Verhandlungsblatt des Südamerika-Symposiums 1984 in Bamberg: 1635–1646.Kuhle, M. (1986): Die Vergletscherung Tibets und die Entstehung von Eiszeiten. In: Spektrum der Wissenschaft 9/86: 42–54.Kuhle, M. (1987): Subtropical Mountain- and Highland-Glaciation as Ice Age Triggers and the Waning of the Glacial Periods in the Pleistocene. In: GeoJournal 14 (4); Kluwer, Dordrecht/ Boston/ London: 393–421.Kuhle, M. (1988): Subtropical Mountain- and Highland-Glaciation as Ice Age Triggers and the Waning of the Glacial Periods in the Pleistocene. In: Chinese Translation Bulletin of Glaciology and Geocryology 5 (4): 1–17 (in Chinese language).Kuhle, M. (1989): Ice-Marginal Ramps: An Indicator of Semiarid Piedmont Glaciations. In: GeoJournal 18; Kluwer, Dordrecht/ Boston/ London: 223–238.Kuhle, M. (1990): Ice Marginal Ramps and Alluvial Fans in Semi-Arid Mountains: Convergence and Difference. In: Rachocki, A.H., Church, M. (eds.): Alluvial fans - A field approach. John Wiley ; Sons Ltd, Chester-New York-Brisbane-Toronto-Singapore: 55–68.Kuhle, M. (1990): The Probability of Proof in Geomorphology - an Example of the Application of Information Theory to a New Kind of Glacigenic Morphological Type, the Ice-marginal Ramp (Bortensander). In: GeoJournal 21 (3); Kluwer, Dordrecht/ Boston/ London: 195–222.Kuhle, M. (2004): The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) glacier cover of the Aconcagua group and adjacent massifs in the Mendoza Andes (South America). In: Ehlers, J., Gibbard, P.L. (Eds.), Quaternary Glaciation— Extent and Chronology. Part III: South America, Asia, Africa, Australia, Antarctica. Development in Quaternary Science, vol. 2c. Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam, pp. 75–81.FloraLaguna de Sonso tropical dry forest in Northern AndesThe Andean region cuts across several natural and floristic regions due to its extension from Caribbean Venezuela to cold, windy and wet Cape Horn passing through the hyperarid Atacama Desert. Rainforests and tropical dry forests used to encircle much of the northern Andes but are now greatly diminished, especially in the El Chocó|Chocó and inter-Andean valleys of Colombia. As a direct opposite of the humid Andean slopes are the relatively dry Andean slopes in most of western Peru, Chile and Argentina. Along with several Interandean Valles, they are typically dominated by deciduous woodland, shrub and xeric vegetation, reaching the extreme in the slopes near the virtually lifeless Atacama Desert.About 30,000 species of vascular plants live in the Andes, with roughly half being endemic to the region, surpassing the diversity of any other hotspot. "biodiv"The small tree ''Cinchona pubescens'', a source of quinine which is used to treat malaria, is found widely in the Andes as far south as Bolivia. Other important crops that originated from the Andes are tobacco and potatoes. The high-altitude ''Polylepis'' forests and woodlands are found in the Andean areas of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile. These trees, by locals referred to as Queñua, Yagual and other names, can be found at altitudes of  above sea level. It remains unclear if the patchy distribution of these forests and woodlands is natural, or the result of clearing which began during the Incan period. Regardless, in modern times the clearance has accelerated, and the trees are now considered to be highly endangered, with some believing that as little as 10% of the original woodland remains.FaunaFile:Tunki Tanpupata.jpg|thumb|A male Andean cock-of-the-rock, a species found in humid Andean forests of Peru, the country of which it is the national bird.Herds of alpacas in the foothills near Ausangate mountain.Fauna of the AndesThe Andes are rich in fauna: With almost 3,500 species, of which roughly 2/3 are endemic to the region, the Andes are the most important region in the world for amphibians.[Tropical Andes] - biodiversityhotspots.orgThe diversity of animals in the Andes is high, with almost 600 species of mammals (13% endemic), more than 1,700 species of birds (about 1/3 endemic), more than 600 species of reptile (about 45% endemic), and almost 400 species of fish (about 1/3 endemic)."biodiv"The vicuña and guanaco can be found living in the Altiplano, while the closely related domesticated llama and alpaca are widely kept by locals as pack animals and for their meat and wool. The crepuscular (active during dawn and dusk) chinchillas, two threatened members of the rodent order, inhabit the Andes' alpine regions. The Andean condor, the largest bird of its kind in the Western Hemisphere, occurs throughout much of the Andes but generally in very low densities. Other animals found in the relatively open habitats of the high Andes include the huemul, cougar, foxes in the genus ''Pseudalopex'', and, for birds, certain species of tinamous (notably members of the genus ''Nothoprocta''), Andean goose, giant coot, flamingos (mainly associated with hypersaline lakes), lesser rhea, Andean flicker, diademed sandpiper-plover, miners, sierra-finches and diuca-finches.Lake Titicaca hosts several endemics, among them the highly endangered Titicaca flightless grebe and Titicaca water frog. A few species of hummingbirds, notably some hillstars, can be seen at altitudes above , but far higher diversities can be found at lower altitudes, especially in the humid Andean forests ("cloud forests") growing on slopes in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and far northwestern Argentina. These forest-types, which includes the Yungas and parts of the Chocó, are very rich in flora and fauna, although few large mammals exist, exceptions being the threatened mountain tapir, spectacled bear and yellow-tailed woolly monkey.Birds of humid Andean forests include mountain-toucans, quetzals and the Andean cock-of-the-rock, while mixed species flocks dominated by tanagers and furnariids commonly are seen - in contrast to several vocal but typically cryptic species of wrens, tapaculos and antpittas.A number of species such as the royal cinclodes and white-browed tit-spinetail  are associated with ''Polylepis'', and consequently also threatened.Human activityAndean statesThe Andes Mountains form a north-south axis of cultural influences. A long series of cultural development culminated in the expansion of the Inca civilization and Inca Empire in the central Andes during the 15th century. The Incas formed this civilization through imperialistic militarism as well as careful and meticulous governmental management. The government sponsored the construction of aqueducts and roads in addition to preexisting installations. Some of these constructions are still in existence today.Devastated by European diseases to which they had no immunity and civil wars, in 1532 the Incas were defeated by an alliance composed of tens of thousands of allies from nations they had subjugated (e.g. Huancas, Chachapoyas, Cañaris) and a small army of 180 Spaniards led by Francisco Pizarro. One of the few Inca sites the Spanish never found in their conquest was Machu Picchu, which lay hidden on a peak on the eastern edge of the Andes where they descend to the Amazon. The main surviving languages of the Andean peoples are those of the Quechua and Aymara language families. Woodbine Parish and Joseph Barclay Pentland surveyed a large part of the Bolivian Andes from 1826 to 1827.In modern times, the largest Andean cities are Bogotá, Colombia, with a population of about eight million, Santiago de Chile, and Medellin, Colombia.TransportationSeveral major cities are either in the Andes or in the foothills, among which are Bogotá, Medellín and Cali, Colombia; Quito, Ecuador; Mérida, Mérida|Mérida, Venezuela; La Paz, Bolivia; Santiago, Chile, and Lima or Cusco, Peru. These and most other cities and large towns are connected with asphalt-paved roads, while smaller towns are often connected by dirt roads, which may require a four-wheel-drive vehicle.The rough terrain has historically put the costs of building highways and railroads that cross the Andes out of reach of most neighboring countries, even with modern civil engineering practices. For example, the main crossover of the Andes between Argentina and Chile is still accomplished through the Paso Internacional Los Libertadores. Only recently the ends of some highways that came rather close to one another from the east and the west have been connected. Much of the transportation of passengers is done via aircraft.However, there is one railroad that connects Chile with Argentina via the Andes, and there are others that make the same connection via southern Bolivia. See railroad maps of that region.There is one or more highways in Bolivia that cross the Andes. Some of these were built during a period of war between Bolivia and Paraguay, in order to transport Bolivian troops and their supplies to the war front in the lowlands of southeastern Bolivia and western Paraguay.For decades, Chile claimed ownership of land on the eastern side of the Andes. However, these claims were given up in about 1870 during the War of the Pacific between Chile, the allied Bolivia and Peru, in a diplomatic deal to keep Argentina out of the war. The Chilean Army and Chilean Navy defeated the combined forces of Bolivia and Peru, and Chile took over Bolivia's only province on the Pacific Coast, some land from Peru that was returned to Peru decades later. Bolivia has been a completely landlocked country ever since. It mostly uses seaports in eastern Argentina and Uruguay for international trade because its diplomatic relations with Chile have been suspended since 1978.Because of the tortuous terrain in places, villages and towns in the mountains—to which travel via motorized vehicles are of little use—are still located in the high Andes of Argentina, Bolivia, Peru, and Ecuador. Locally, the relatives of the camel, the llama, and the alpaca continue to carry out important uses as pack animals, but this use has generally diminished in modern times. Donkeys, mules, and horses are also useful.AgriculturePhotograph of young Peruvian farmers sowing maize and beans.Vertical archipelagoThe ancient peoples of the Andes such as the Incas have practiced irrigation techniques for over 6,000 years. Because of the mountain slopes, terracing has been a common practice. Terracing, however, was only extensively employed after Incan imperial expansions to fuel their expanding realm. The potato holds a very important role as an internally consumed staple crop. Maize was also an important crop for these people, and was used for the production of chicha, important to Andean native people. Currently, tobacco, cotton and coffee are the main export crops. Coca, despite eradication programmes in some countries, remains an important crop for legal local use in a mildly stimulating herbal tea, and, both controversially and illegally, for the production of cocaine.MiningThe Andes rose to fame for their mineral wealth during the Spanish conquest of South America. Although Andean Amerindian peoples crafted ceremonial jewelry of gold and other metals the mineralizations of the Andes were first mined in large scale after the Spanish arrival. Potosí in present-day Bolivia and Cerro de Pasco in Peru were one of the principal mines of the Spanish Empire in the New World. Río de la Plata and Argentina derive their names from the silver of Potosí.Currently, mining in the Andes of Chile and Peru places these countries as the first and third major producers of copper in the world. Peru also contains the largest goldmine in the world: the Yanacocha. The Bolivian Andes produce principally tin although historically silver mining had a huge impact on the economy of 17th century Europe.There is a long history of mining in the Andes, from the Spanish silver mines in Potosí in the 16th century to the vast current porphyry copper deposits of Chuquicamata and Escondida in Chile and Toquepala in Peru. Other metals including iron, gold and tin in addition to non-metallic resources are important.File:Huasos Maulinos - Rugendas.jpg|Chilean huasos, 19th centuryFile:Macchupicchu.jpg|The mountain Huayna Picchu overlooks the Inca estate (land) of Machu PicchuPeaksList of mountains in the AndesFile:Bariloche- Argentina.jpg|thumb|right|Llao Llao Hotel with the Andes on the background, in the city of Bariloche, Argentina.File:Aconcagua (aerial).jpg|thumb|right|The Aconcagua is the highest mountain in the Americas and in the entire world outside of the Himalayas.File:Fitz Roy Chalten Argentina Todor Bozhinov 2013.jpg|thumb|right|Mount Fitz Roy|El Chaltén, in Santa Cruz Province.File:162 - Fitz Roy - Janvier 2010.jpg|thumb|right|Mount Fitz Roy.This list contains some of the major peaks in the Andes mountain range. The highest peak is Aconcagua of Argentina (see below).ArgentinaList of mountains in Argentina* Aconcagua,* Cerro Bonete,* Galán,* Mercedario,* Pissis,Border between Argentina and Chile* Cerro Bayo,* Cerro Fitz Roy,  or 3,405m, Patagonia, also known as Cerro Chaltén* Cerro Escorial,* Cordón del Azufre,* Falso Azufre,* Incahuasi,* Lastarria,* Llullaillaco,* Maipo,* Marmolejo,* Ojos del Salado,* Olca,* Sierra Nevada de Lagunas Bravas,* Socompa,* Nevado Tres Cruces,  (south summit) (III Region)* Tronador,* Tupungato,* Nacimiento,Bolivia* Janq'u Uma,* Cabaraya,* Chacaltaya,* Wayna Potosí,* Illampu,* Illimani,* Laram Q'awa,* Macizo de Pacuni,* Nevado Anallajsi,* Nevado Sajama,* Patilla Pata,* Tata Sabaya,File:Nevado Sajama.jpg|SajamaFile:Huayna Potosí La Paz - Bolivia.jpg|Wayna PotosíBorder between Bolivia and Chile* Acotango,* Michincha,* Iru Phutunqu,* Licancabur,* Olca,* Parinacota,* Paruma,* Pomerape,File:Laguna Verde Bolivia.jpg|Licancabur, Bolivia/ChileFile:Parinacota.jpg|ParinacotaChileList of mountains in Chile* Monte San Valentin,* Cerro Paine Grande,* Cerro Macá, c.* Monte Darwin, c.* Volcan Hudson, c.* Cerro Castillo Dynevor, c.* Mount Tarn, c.* Polleras, c.* Acamarachi,c.File:Santiago Skyline.jpg|Santiago de Chile on the western slopes of a snowcapped AndesFile:Massif Reflected.jpg|View of Cuernos del Paine in Torres del Paine National ParkColombia* Pico Cristóbal Colón,* Nevado del Huila,* Nevado del Ruiz,* Nevado del Tolima,* Pico Pan de Azucar,* Ritacuba Negra,* Nevado del Cumbal,* Cerro Negro de Mayasquer,* Ritacuba Blanco,* Nevado del Quindío,* Purace,* Santa Isabel,* Doña Juana,* Galeras,* Azufral.File:Ritacuba-blanco.jpg|Ritacuba blanco the highest peak of Cordillera Oriental, Colombia.File:Nevado del Ruiz by Edgar.png|Nevado del Ruiz, ColombiaEcuador* Antisana,* Cayambe,* Chimborazo,* Corazón (volcano)|Corazón,* Cotopaxi,* El Altar,* Illiniza,* Pichincha,* Quilotoa,* Reventador,* Sangay,* Tungurahua,* Titicaca,File:Volcán Chimborazo, "El Taita Chimborazo".jpg|Chimborazo near Riobamba, EcuadorFile:Volcán Tungurahua.jpg|Tungurahua, EcuadorFile:EL CAYAMBE DESDE EL AVION.JPG|Cayambe, EcuadorFile:Volcán El Altar - Riobamba Ecuador.jpg|Volcán El Altar - Riobamba - EcuadorFile:Cotopaxi.jpg|CotopaxiFile:Andes Mountains South America Photograph 017.JPG|Andes near OtavaloFile:Historic Center of Quito - World Heritage Site by UNESCO - Photo 186.JPG|Pichincha Volcano, an active stratovolcano in the Ecuadorian Andes photographed from the Historic Center of QuitoFile:Andes Mountains South America Photograph 022.JPG|Imbabura Volcano, an inactive stratovolcanoPeru* Alpamayo,* Artesonraju,* Carnicero,* Chumpi,* El Misti,* El Toro,* Huandoy,* Huascarán,* Jirishanca,* Pumasillu,* Rasaq,* Runtuy,* Sarapu,* Seria Norte,* Siula Grande,* Waytapallana,* Yerupaja,* Yerupaja Chico,File:Alpamayo.jpg|Alpamayo, PeruFile:Chachani and Misti.jpg|Chachani and El Misti, PeruFile:Nevadohuandoy.jpg|Huandoy, PeruFile:Yerupaja Grande.jpg|YerupajaVenezuela* Pico Bolívar,* Pico Humboldt,* Pico Bonpland,* Pico La Concha,* Pico Piedras Blancas,* Pico El Águila,* Pico El Toro* Pico El León* Pico MucuñuqueFile:PicoBolivar2.jpg|Pico Bolívar, VenezuelaFile:Pico Humboldt.jpg|Pico Humboldt, VenezuelaFile:Picolaconcha.png|Pico La Concha, VenezuelaFile:Picoelaguila.jpg|Pico El Águila, VenezuelaFile:Picoeltoro.jpg|Pico El Toro, VenezuelaFile:Pico_El_Leon.jpg|Pico El León, VenezuelaFile:Picomuñuquc.jpg|Pico Mucuñuque, VenezuelaFile:Glacial_Pico_Humboldt_4.JPG|Snow in the Pico Humboldt, VenezuelaSee also* Andean Geology - a scientific journal* Andesite line* Apu (god)* Cordillera Mountains in the Philippines* List of longest mountain chains in the world* Mountain Passes of the AndesNotesReferences* Oncken, O. et al. (2006). ''The Andes. Active Subduction Orogeny.'' Springer: Berlin.* Biggar, J. (2005). ''The Andes: A Guide For Climbers''. 3rd. edition. Andes: Kirkcudbrightshire. ISBN 0-9536087-2-7* de Roy, T. (2005). ''The Andes: As the Condor Flies.'' Firefly books: Richmond Hill. ISBN 1-55407-070-8* Fjeldså, J. ; N. Krabbe (1990). ''The Birds of the High Andes.'' Zoological Museum, University of Copenhagen: Copenhagen. ISBN 87-88757-16-1* Fjeldså, J. ; M. Kessler (1996). ''Conserving the biological diversity of Polylepis woodlands of the highlands on Peru and Bolivia, a contribution to sustainable natural resource management in the Andes.'' NORDECO: Copenhagen. ISBN 978-87-986168-0-1External links*Category:Ecology of the Andes|*