File:William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1825-1905) - Song of the Angels (1881).jpg|thumb|Song of the Angels (1881) William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1825-1905)'''Angels''' have appeared in works of art since early Christian art, Angel-like beings appear in art from before the Christian era. Figures in ancient Mesopotamian and Greek art may be the inspiration for the common Christian image of angels, a popular subject for Byzantine and European paintings and sculpture.Angels are usually intended, in both Christian and Islamic art, to be beautiful, though several depictions attempt for more awesome/frightening attributes, notably in the depiction of the living creatures, ophanim and cherubim.  As a matter of theology, they are spiritual beings who do not eat or excrete and are genderless. Many angels in art may appear to the modern eye to be gendered as either male or female by their dress or actions, but until the 19th century, even the most female looking will normally lack breasts, and the figures should normally be considered as genderless. In 19th-century art, especially funerary art, this traditional convention is sometimes abandoned.Christian artWinged angels in togas, Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore, Rome (432-440)In the Early ChurchSpecific ideas regarding how to portray angels began to develop in the early Church. Since angels are defined as pure spirits,the lack of a defined form has allowed artists wide latitude for creativity. Daniel 8:15 describes Gabriel as appearing in the “likeness of man” and in Daniel 9:21 he is referred to as “the man Gabriel.” Such anthropomorphic descriptions of an angel are consistent with previous descriptions of angels, as in Genesis 19:5.[Everson, David. "Gabriel Blow Your Horn! - A Short History of Gabriel within Jewish Literature", Xavier University, December 2009] They were usually depicted in the form of young men.The earliest known Christian image of an angel, in the ''Cubicolo dell'Annunziazione'' in the Catacomb of Priscilla, which is dated to the middle of the third century, is a depiction of the Annunciation in which Gabriel is portrayed without wings. Representations of angels on sarcophagi and on objects such as lamps and reliquaries of that period also show them without wings,Proverbio(2007), pp. 81-89; cf. review in ''La Civiltà Cattolica'', 3795-3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327-328. as for example the angel in the ''Sacrifice of Isaac'' scene in the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus.In a third-century fresco of the Hebrew children in the furnace, in the cemetery of St. Priscilla, a dove takes the place of the angel, while a fourth-century representation of the same subject, in the coemeterium majus, substitutes the Hand of God for the heavenly messenger.[Hassett, Maurice. "Early Christian Representations of Angels." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 25 Dec. 2013]The earliest known representation of angels with wings is on what is called the Prince's Sarcophagus, discovered at Sarigüzel, near Istanbul, in the 1930s, and attributed to the time of Theodosius I (379-395).  Flying winged angels, very often in pairs flanking a central figure or subject, are derivations in visual terms from pairs of winged Victories in classical art.marshallIn this same period, Saint John Chrysostom explained the significance of angels' wings: "They manifest a nature's sublimity. That is why Gabriel is represented with wings. Not that angels have wings, but that you may know that they leave the heights and the most elevated dwelling to approach human nature. Accordingly, the wings attributed to these powers have no other meaning than to indicate the sublimity of their nature."From then on Christian art generally represented angels with wings, as in the cycle of mosaics in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore (432-440).Proverbio(2007), pp. 90-95; cf. review in ''La Civiltà Cattolica'', 3795-3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327-328.  Multi-winged angels, often with only their face and wings showing, drawn from the higher grades of angels, especially cherubim and seraphim, are derived from Persian art, and are usually shown only in heavenly contexts, as opposed to performing tasks on earth.  They often appear in the pendentives of domes or semi-domes of churches.Byzantine artImage:Erzengel Michael und Gabriel.jpg|thumb|12th century icon of the Archangels Michael and Gabriel wearing the ''loros'' of the Imperial guards.Angels appear in Byzantine art in mosaics and icons. Artists found some of their inspiration from winged Greek figures such as "Victory". They also drew from imperial iconography. Court eunuchs could rise to positions of authority in the Empire. They performed ceremonial functions and served as trusted messengers. Amelia R. Brown points out that legislation under Justinian indicates that many of them came from the Caucasus, having light eyes, hair, and skin, as well as the “comely features and fine bodies” desired by slave traders.brownThose "castrated in childhood developed a distinctive skeletal structure, lacked full masculine musculature, body hair and beards,....” As officials, they would wear a white tunic decorated with gold. Brown suggests that  "Byzantine artists drew, consciously or not, on this iconography of the court eunuch".[Brown, Amelia R., "Painting the Bodiless: Angels and Eunuchs in Byzantine Art and Culture", University of Queensland (2007)]Daniel 10: 5-6 describes an angel as clothed in linen and girt with gold.longhurstAngels, especially the archangel Michael, who were depicted as military-style agents of God, came to be shown wearing Late Antique military uniform.  This could be either the normal military dress, with a tunic to about the knees, armour breastplate and pteruges, but also often the specific dress of the bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor, with a long tunic and the ''loros'', a long gold and jewelled  pallium restricted to the Imperial family and their closest guards, and in icons to archangels.  The basic military dress it is still worn in pictures into the Baroque period and beyond in the West, and up to the present day in Eastern Orthodox icons. Other angels came to be conventionally depicted in long robes.Medieval artMedieval depictions of angels borrow from the Byzantine. In the French ''Hours of Anne of Brittany'', Gabriel wears a dalmatic. In the later Middle Ages they often wear the vestments of a deacon, a cope over a dalmatic, especially Gabriel in Annunciation scenes - for example ''The Annunciation'' by Jan van Eyck. This indicated that, for all their powers, they could not perform the Eucharist, and were in this respect outranked by every priest, reinforcing the prestige of the clergy.  In Early Christian art white robes were almost invariably adopted, sometimes bound with the "golden girdle" of Revelation. During the mediæval period senior angels were often clad in every brilliant colour, while junior ranks wore white. Early Renaissance painters such as Jan van Eyck and Fra Angelico painted angels with multi-colored wings.  Depictions of angels came to combine medieval notions of beauty with feminine ideals of grace and beauty, as in da Panicale's 1435 ''Baptism of Christ''.gorgievskiFra Angelico, The Annunciation, 1437-46The classical ''erotes'' or ''putto'' re-appeared in art during the Italian Renaissance in both religious and mythological art, and is often known in English as a cherub, the singular of cherubim, actually one of the higher ranks in the Christian angelic hierarchy.  They normally appear in groups and are generally given wings in religious art, and are sometimes represented as just a winged head.  They generally are just in attendance, except that they may be amusing Christ or John the Baptist as infants in scenes of the Holy Family.Islamic artAccording to Islamic teaching, angels are made of light, are beautiful, and have wings; although the shape and form of the wings are unknown.[Islamic Resource ; Information Service (IRIS), New Zealand] In Islamic art angels mainly appear mainly in narrative scenes in miniature painting, in the Persian Mughal and Ottoman traditions.  They are especially common in illustrations of the Prophet's Mi'raj, one of the occasions where their presence is mentioned in the Qu'ran.  Their appearance generally draws more from the iconography of pre-Islamic Persia, and Buddhist art, than from angels in Christian art. Some of the earliest Ilkhanid examples are exceptions to this.  They have wings, often multi-coloured, and very often floating scarves drawing from Chinese Buddhist art. They are not very common however; many appear in illustrations to biographical accounts of the life of the Prophet Muhammad, which are themselves rare.  There are a few studies of angels by themselves, especially from Safavid Persia.Modern artIn the late nineteenth century artists' model Jane Burden Morris came to embody an ideal of beauty for pre-Raphaelite painters. With the use of her long dark hair and features made somewhat more androgynous, they created a prototype Victorian angel which would appear in paintings and stained glass windows. Roger Homan notes that Edward Burne-Jones and others used her image often and in different ways, creating a new type of angel.[Homan, Roger. "Jane Burden: How a Pre-Raphaelite model changed our image of angels", ''The Social Affairs Unit'', 14 October 2005]The contemporary artist Banksy portrays angels in flak-jackets and gives policemen wings.["Angels:Messengers in the modern world", ''The Economist'', 18 December 2008]See alsoSaints* Archangel Michael in Christian art* Michael (archangel)* Gabriel* Angels in Islam* Angelus* Fleur de lys* List of names referring to El* SeraphGalleries of AngelsChristian artFile:Jan van eyck, annunciazione, dettaglio, 1434-36 circa.JPG|The Archangel Gabriel in a deacon's vestments, and multi-colored wings in Jan van Eyck's ''Annunciation'', 1434–36File:Master of the St Lucy Legend - Mary, Queen of Heaven- c. 1480 - c. 1510 (hi res).jpg|Master of the St Lucy Legend, ''Mary, Queen of Heaven'', c 1480-1510, accompanied by angels, some making music and others investmentsImage:Guido Reni 031.jpg|Guido Reni's Michael (in Santa Maria della Concezione church, Rome, 1636) tramples Satan. A mosaic of the same painting decorates ''St. Michael's Altar'' in St. Peter's Basilica.Image:Fouquet Madonna.jpg|''Madonna Surrounded by Seraphim and Cherubim'' by Jean FouquetImage:Jacob-angel.jpg|''Jacob'' wrestling with the Angel, by Gustave DoréImage:Seraphim - Petites Heures de Jean de Berry.jpg|''God surrounded by Seraphim'' (Petites Heures of Jean de France, Duc de Berry)File:Cathedral St Michaels Victory.jpg|''St Michaels Victory over the Devil'', a sculpture by Sir Jacob EpsteinFile:Giotto - Scrovegni - -36- - Lamentation (The Mourning of Christ).jpg|''Lamentation'' by Giotto di BondoneFile:Da Vinci The Annunciation.jpg|''The Annunciation'' by Leonardo da Vinci, c. 1472–75Image:Paradiso Canto 31.jpg|''Rosa Celeste'': by Gustave DoréFile:Aniol z dudami.jpg|by Jan MatejkoFile:07Thessaloniki St-Dimetrios03.jpg|Church of Saint Demetrius Patron Saint of ThessalonikiImage:Archangel Gabriel Icon wearing sacred blue.png|Icon of Archangel Gabriel by Anonymous, c. 13th centuryImage:Archangel Gabriel Outside Jesus' Tomb after Resurrection.png|Angel in White by Anonymous, c. 1230, Mileseva Monastery, Republic of SerbiaImage:Archangel Gabriel (Gelati).jpg|Archangel Gabriel. Part of the mosaic fresco from Gelati Monastery, Georgia c. 12th centuryImage:Archangel Gabriel Icon in Blue and Red.png|Archangel Gabriel Icon by Anonymous, c. 13th century, Saint Catherine's Monastery, Sinai, EgyptFile:angel letiel.jpg|Ángel arcabucero, 17th-century Peru (?)File:Schnorr_von_Carolsfeld_Bibel_in_Bildern_1860_239.png|Michael and the Dragon. Die Bibel in Bildern by Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld, 1860Islamic artFile:Mohammed receiving the submission of the Banu Nadir.jpg|Angel with Mohammad (riding the horse), who receives the submission of the Banu Nadir, from the Ilkhanid Jami Al-Tawarikh, c. 1315File:Arabic-manuscript.jpg|A page from 'The Wonders of Creation and the Oddities of Existence' - Egypt/Syria c.1375-1425 ADImage:Miraj_by_Sultan_Muhammad.jpg|Persian Miraj image from 1539–43, reflecting the new, Safavid convention of depicting Muhammad veiled.File:Persian angel 1555.jpg|Persian angel, 1555NotesReferences*External linksAngels