'''AOL Instant Messenger''' ('''AIM''') is an instant messaging and presence computer program which uses the proprietary OSCAR instant messaging protocol and the TOC protocol to allow registered users to communicate in real time.AIM became incredibly popular in the early 2000s in North America, and was the leading instant messaging application in that region. AIM's popularity steeply degraded at the end of the decade, and its fall has often been compared with other once-mighty internet services such as MySpace.HistoryAOL Instant Messenger was released by America Online (AOL) in May 1997 for Microsoft Windows.Abbruzzese, Jason. . Mashable.com. 2014-04-05. The software, maintained by AOL, Inc., at one time had the largest share of the instant messaging market in North America, especially in the United States (with 52% of the total reported ). This does not include other instant messaging software related to or developed by AOL, such as ICQ and iChat.Its main competitors during its heyday were ICQ, Yahoo! Messenger and MSN Messenger. AOL particularly had a rivalry or 'chat war' with rival Microsoft starting in 1999. There were several attempts from Microsoft to simultaneously log into their own and AIM's protocol servers. AOL were not happy about this and started blocking MSN Messenger from being able to access AIM.AIM went officially mobile in early 2008 when the application was released for Windows Mobile devices. However AIM could already be used on various devices beforehand with third-party applications, and as early as 2002 on a Sidekick.Since 2012, stand-alone official AIM client software includes advertisements and is available for Microsoft Windows, Windows Mobile, Mac OS, Mac OS X, Android, iOS, BlackBerry OS.Usage declineAround 2009 AIM started to lose popularity rapidly, partly because many people started purely moving onto social networking websites for instant messaging.June 2011, one source reported AOL Instant Messenger market share had collapsed to 0.73%. However, this number only reflects installed IM applications, and not active users. The engineers responsible for AIM claimed that they were unable to convince AOL management that free was the future.On March 3, 2012, AOL got rid of all the developing staff for AIM, effectively ending development of the application after 15 years. However the service is still active and help support is still provided.The 'Running Man'The AIM mascot was designed by JoRoan Lazaro and was implemented in the first release in 1997. This was a yellow stickman-like figure, often called the 'Running Man'. The mascot appeared on all AIM logos and most wordmarks, and always appeared at the top of the buddy list. AIM's incredible popularity in the late 1990s and the 2000s led to the Running Man becoming a familiar brand on the internet. After over 14 years, the iconic logo was finally disappeared as part of the AIM rebranding in 2011. However, in August 2013 the Running Man once again returned.name="theatlantic.com"In 2014, an editor of the site Complex.com called it a 'symbol of America'. In April 2015 the Running Man was officially featured in the Virgin London Marathon, dressed by a person for the AOL-partnered Free The Children charity.ProtocolThe standard protocol that AIM clients use to communicate is called Open System for CommunicAtion in Realtime (OSCAR). Most AOL-produced versions of AIM and popular third party AIM clients use this protocol. However, AOL also created a simpler protocol called TOC that lacks many of OSCAR's features but is sometimes used for clients that only require basic chat functionality. The TOC/TOC2 protocol specifications were made available by AOL, while OSCAR is a closed protocol that third parties have had to reverse-engineer.In January 2008, AOL introduced experimental Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) support for AIM, allowing AIM users to communicate using the standardized, open-source XMPP. However, in March 2008, this service was discontinued. As of May 2011, AOL offers limited XMPP support.PrivacyFor privacy regulations, AIM has strict age restrictions. AIM accounts are available only for people over the age of 13;  children younger than that are not permitted access to AIM.Under the AIM Privacy Policy, AOL has no rights to read or monitor any private communications between users. The profile of the user has no privacy."6 Facts About AIM's Privacy Policy"If public content is accessed. it can be used for online, print or even broadcast advertising. etc. This is outlined in the policy and terms of service: "... you grant AOL, its parent, affiliates, subsidiaries, assigns, agents and licensees the irrevocable, perpetual, worldwide right to reproduce, display, perform, distribute, adapt and promote this Content in any medium". This allows anything one posts to be used without a separate request for permission."6 Facts About AIM's Privacy Policy"The issue of AIM's security has been called into question. AOL states that it has taken great steps to insure that personal information will not be accessed by unauthorized members, but that it cannot guarantee that that will not happen."6 Facts About AIM's Privacy Policy"AIM is different from other clients, such as Yahoo! Messenger, in that it does not require approval from one buddy to be added to another's buddy list. As a result, it is possible for users to keep other unsuspecting users on their buddy list to see when they are online, read their status and away messages, and read their profiles. In fact, there is a Web API to display one's status and away message as a widget on one's Web page. However, one can block another user from communicating and seeing one's status, but this does not prevent the user from creating a new account that is not blocked and therefore can still track the first user's status. A more complete privacy option is to select a menu option allowing communication only with those on one's buddy list; this causes blocking (thus appearing offline to) all users who are not on one's buddy list.Chat robotsAOL and various other companies supply robots on AIM that can receive messages and send a response based on the bot's purpose. For example, bots can help with studying, like StudyBuddy. Some are made to relate to children and teenagers, like Spleak, others give advice, and others are for more general purposes, such as SmarterChild. The more useful chat bots have features like the ability to play games, get sport scores, weather forecasts or financial stock information. Users were able to talk to automated chat bots that could respond to natural human language. They were primarily put into place as a marketing strategy and for unique advertising options.  It was used by advertisers to market products or build better consumer relations.Before the inclusions of such bots, the other bots DoorManBot and AIMOffline provided features that are provided today by AOL for those who needed it. ZolaOnAOL and ZoeOnAOL were short lived bots that ultimately retired their features in favor of SmarterChild. As of November 18, 2008, the SmarterChild bot for AIM was retired and is no longer offering any services.URI schemeAOL Instant Messenger's installation process automatically installs an extra URI scheme ("protocol") handler into some Web browsers, so URIs beginning "aim:;/tt;" can open a new AIM window with specified parameters. This is similar in function to the mailto:;/tt; URI scheme, which creates a new e-mail message using the system's default mail program. For instance, a Web page might include a link like the following in its HTML source to open a window for sending a message to the AIM user ''notarealuser'':;lt;a href="aim:goim?screenname=notarealuser";gt;Send Message;lt;/a;gt;To specify a message body, the message parameter is used, so the link location might look like this:aim:goim?screenname=notarealuser;message=This+is+my+messageTo specify an away message, the message parameter is used, so the link location might look like this:aim:goaway?message=Hello,+my+name+is+BillWhen placing this inside a URL link, an AIM user could click on the URL link and the away message "Hello, my name is Bill" would instantly become their away message.To add a buddy, the addbuddy message is used, with the screenname parameteraim:addbuddy?screenname=notarealuserThis type of link is commonly found on forum profiles, to easily add contactsVulnerabilitiesAIM has security weaknesses that have enabled exploits to be created that use third-party software to perform malicious acts on users' computers. Although most are relatively harmless, such as being kicked off the AIM service, others perform potentially dangerous actions such as sending viruses. Some of these exploits rely on social engineering to spread by automatically sending instant messages that contain a URL accompanied by text suggesting the receiving user click on it, an action which leads to infection. These messages can easily be mistaken as coming from a friend and contain a link to a Web address that installs software on the user's computer to restart the cycle.Users have also reported sudden additions of toolbars and advertisements from third parties in the newer version of AIM. Multiple complaints about the lack of control of third party involvement have caused many users to stop using the service."fileforum.betanews.com"Extra featuresiPhone applicationOn March 6, 2008, during Apple Inc.'s iPhone SDK event, AOL announced that they would be releasing an AIM application for iPhone and iPod Touch users. The application is available for free from the App Store, but the company also provides a paid version, which displays no advertisements. Both are available from the App Store. The AIM client for iPhone and iPod Touch supports standard AIM accounts as well as MobileMe accounts.  There is also an express version of AIM accessible through the Safari browser on the iPhone and iPod Touch.In 2011 AOL launched a massive overhaul of their Instant Messaging service. Included in the update was a brand new iOS application for iPhone and iPod Touch which incorporated all the latest features.  A brand new icon was used for the application, featuring the new cursive logo for AIM.  The user-interface was entirely redone for the features including: a new buddy list, group messaging, in-line photos and videos, as well as improved file-sharing.Currently the application is in version 5.0.5, which was updated as of March 2012.  In the latest iteration, it supports more social stream features, much like Facebook and Twitter, as well as the ability to send voice messages up to 60 seconds long.iPad applicationOn April 3, 2010 Apple released the first generation iPad. Along with this newly released device AOL released the AIM application for iPad. It was built entirely from scratch for the new version iOS with a specialized user-interface for the device. It supports geo location, Facebook status updates and chat, MySpace, Twitter, YouTube, Foursquare and many social networking platforms.AIM ExpressAIM Express runs in a pop-up browser window. It is intended for use by people who are unwilling or unable to install a standalone application or those at computers that lack the AIM application. AIM Express supports many of the standard features included in the stand-alone client, but does not provide advanced features like file transfer, audio chat, video conferencing, or buddy info. It is implemented in Adobe Flash. It is an upgrade to the prior AOL Quick Buddy, which was later available for older systems that cannot handle Express before being discontinued. Express and Quick Buddy are similar to MSN Web Messenger and Yahoo! Messenger#Web Messenger|Yahoo! Web Messenger.AIM PagesAIM PagesAIM Pages was released in May 2006, allowing the 63 million AIM users to create an online, dynamic profile. The buddy list serves as the basis for the AIM Page social networking service. An AIM Page is built using modules following the ModuleT microformat. AIM Pages was discontinued in late 2007.AIM for MacAOL released an all-new AIM for the Macintosh on September 29, 2008 and the final build on December 15, 2008. The redesigned AIM for Mac is a full universal binary Cocoa API application that supports both Tiger and Leopard – Mac OS X 10.4.8 (and above) or Mac OS X 10.5.3 (and above). On October 1, 2009, AOL released AIM 2.0 for Mac.AIM real-time IMThis feature is available for AIM 7 and allows for a user to see what the other is typing as it is being done. It was developed and built with assistance from Trace Research and Development Centre at University of Wisconsin-Madison and Gallaudet University. The application provides visually impaired users the ability to convert messages from text (words) to speech. For the application to work users must have AIM 6.8 or higher, as it is not compatible with older versions of AIM software, AIM for Mac or iChat."What is Real-Time IM"AIM to mobile (messaging to phone numbers)This feature allows text messaging to a phone number (text messaging is less functional than instant messaging).Discontinued featuresAIM for PhonelineAIM Phoneline was a Voice over IP PC-PC, PC-Phone and Phone-to-PC service provided via the AOL Instant Messenger (AIM) application. It was also known to work with Apple's iChat Client.Launched on May 16, 2006, AIM Phoneline provided users the ability to have several local numbers, allowing AIM users to receive free incoming calls. The service allowed users to make calls to landlines and mobile devices through the use of a computer. The service, however, was only free for receiving and AOL charged users $14.95 a month for unlimited calling plan.In order to use AIM Phoneline users had to install the latest free version of AIM Triton software and needed a good set of headphones with a boom microphone. It could take several days after a user signed up before it started working."pcworld.com"The service provided users with many interfaces such as Auto Action APIs, Ringback Tone APIs and Screen Name Services API that made the AIM Phoneline a great service.On January 13, 2009, the service was officially closed. The closing of the free service  caused the number associated with the service to be disabled and not transferrable for a different service.AIM Call OutAIM Call Out is a discontinued Voice over IP PC-PC, PC-Phone and Phone-to-PC service provided by AOL via its AOL Instant Messenger (AIM) application that replaced the defunct AIM Phoneline service in November 2007. It did not depend on the AIM client and could be used with only an AIM screenname via the WebConnect feature or a dedicated SIP device. The AIM Call Out service was shut down on March 25, 2009.SecurityOn November 4, 2014, AIM scored 1 out of 7 points on the Electronic Frontier Foundation's secure messaging scorecard. AIM received a point for encryption during transit but lost points because communications are not encrypted with a key the provider doesn't have access to (i.e. the communications are not end-to-end encrypted), users can't verify contacts' identities, past messages are not secure if the encryption keys are stolen (i.e. the service does not provide forward secrecy), the code is not open to independent review (i.e. the code is not open-source), the security design is not properly documented, and there has not been a recent independent security audit. BlackBerry Messenger, Ebuddy XMS, Hushmail, Kik Messenger, Skype, Viber, and Yahoo! Messenger|Yahoo Messenger also scored 1 out of 7 points."secure-messaging-scorecard"References30emExternal links*