the Greek goddessCyprisPandemos (butterfly)'''Aphrodite''' ( ; Greek: ) is the Greek goddess of love, beauty, pleasure, and procreation. Her Roman equivalent is the goddess Venus.''Larousse Desk Reference Encyclopedia'', The Book People, Haydock, 1995, p. 215. She is identified with the planet Venus.As with many ancient Greek deities, there is more than one story about her origins. According to Hesiod's ''Theogony'', she was born when Cronus cut off Uranus's genitals and threw them into the sea, and she arose from the sea foam (''aphros''). ;;According to Homer's ''Iliad'', she is the daughter of Zeus and Dione (Titaness/Oceanid)|Dione. According to Plato (''Symposium'', 180e), these two origins were of entirely separate entities: Aphrodite Ourania and Aphrodite Pandemos.Because of her beauty, other gods feared that their rivalry over her would interrupt the peace among them and lead to war, so Zeus married her to Hephaestus, who, because of his ugliness and deformity, was not seen as a threat. Aphrodite had many lovers—both gods, such as Ares, and men, such as Anchises. She played a role in the Eros and Psyche legend, and later was both Adonis's lover and his surrogate mother. Many lesser beings were said to be children of Aphrodite.Aphrodite is also known as '''Cytherea''' (''Lady of Cythera'') and '''Cypris''' (''Lady of Cyprus'') after the two cult sites, Cythera and Cyprus, which claimed to be her place of birth.  Myrtle, doves, sparrows, horses, and swans were said to be sacred to her. The ancient Greeks identified her with the Ancient Egyptian goddess Hathor.Reginald Eldred Witt, ''Isis in the ancient world'' (Johns Hopkins University Press) 1997:125.ISBN 0-8018-5642-6Aphrodite had many other names, such as Acidalia, Cytherea, and Cerigo, each used by a different local cult of the goddess in Greece. The Greeks recognized all of these names as referring to the single goddess Aphrodite, despite the slight differences in what these local cults believed the goddess demanded of them. The Attic philosophers of the 4th century, however, drew a distinction between a celestial Aphrodite (Aphrodite Urania) of transcendent principles, and a separate, "common" Aphrodite who was the goddess of the people (Aphrodite Pandemos).Etymology''Aphrodite'', perhaps altered after ''aphrós'' () "foam", stems from the more archaic Cretan ''Aphordíta'' and Cypriot ''Aphorodíta'', and was probably ultimately borrowed from Cypriot Phoenician.Robert Beekes, ''Etymological Dictionary of Greek'', Vol. 1 (Leiden: Brill, 2010), 179. Herodotus and Pausanias recorded that Aphrodite's oldest non-Greek temple lay in the Syrian city of Ascalon where she was known as ''Ourania'', an obvious reference to Astarte. This suggests that Aphrodite's cult located at Cythera-Cyprus came from the Phoenicians. The fact that one of Aphrodite's chief centers of worship remained on the southwestern Cypriot coast settled by Phoenicians, where the goddess had long been worshiped as ''Ashtart'' (ʻštrt), points to the transmission of Aphrodite's original cult from Phoenicia to Cyprus then to mainland Greece. So far, however, attempts to derive the name from Aphrodite's Semitic precursor have been inconclusive.A number of false etymologies have been proposed through the ages. Hesiod derives ''Aphrodite'' from ''aphrós'' "foam," interpreting the name as "risen from the foam".Hesiod, ''Theogony'', 176ff. Janda (2010), accepting this as genuine, claims the foam birth myth as an Indo-European mytheme. Janda intereprets the name as a compound ''aphrós'' "foam" and ''déato'';; "[she] seems, shines", meaning "she who shines from the foam [ocean]", supposedly a byname of Eos, the dawn goddess.Janda, Michael, ''Die Musik nach dem Chaos'', Innsbruck 2010, p. 65 Likewise, Mallory and Adams (1997)Mallory, J.P., and Adams, D.Q. ''Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture''. London: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishing, 1997. propose an Indo-European compound '''' "very" and '''' "to shine", also referring to Eos. However, etymologies based on comparison with Eos are unlikely since Aphrodite's attributes are entirely different from those of Eos (or the Vedic deity Ushas).Charles Penglase, ''Greek Myths and Mesopotamia: Parallels and Influence in the Homeric Hymns and Hesiod'' (Routledge, 1997), 164; citing Deborah Boedeker, ''Aphrodite's Entry into Greek Epic'' (Leiden: Brill, 1974), 15-6. Finally, the medieval ''Etymologicum Magnum'' offers a highly contrived etymology, deriving ''Aphrodite'' from the compound ''habrodíaitos'' (), "she who lives delicately", from ''habrós'' and ''díaita''. The alteration from ''b'' to ''ph'' is explained as a "familiar" characteristic of Greek "obvious from the Macedonians",Etymologicum Magnum, Ἀφροδίτη despite the fact that the name cannot be of Macedonian origin.A number of improbable non-Greek etymologies have been suggested in scholarship. One Semitic etymology compares Aphrodite to the Assyrian ''barīrītu'', the name of a female demon that appears in Middle Babylonian and Late Babylonian texts.see Chicago Assyrian Dictionary vol. 2 p.111 Hammarström (1921)M. Hammarström, ''Glotta: Zeitschrift für griechische und lateinische Sprache'' 11 (1921): 215f. looks to Etruscan, comparing ''(e)prϑni'' "lord", an Etruscan honorific loaned into Greek as Prytaneis|πρύτανις. This would make the theonym in origin an honorific, "the lady". Hjalmar Frisk and Robert Beekes (2010) rejects this etymology as implausible, especially since Aphrodite actually appears in Etruscan in the borrowed form ''Apru'' (from Greek ''Aphrō'', clipped form of ''Aphrodite'').MythologyBirthFile:Sandro Botticelli - La nascita di Venere - Google Art Project - edited.jpg|thumb|410px|''The Birth of Venus'' by Sandro Botticelli, ''circa'' 1485.Aphrodite is usually said to have been born near her chief center of worship,  Paphos, on the island of Cyprus, which is why she is sometimes called "Cyprian", especially in the poetic works of Sappho. However, other versions of her myth have her born near the island of Cythera, hence another of her names, "Cytherea".Homer, ''Odyssey'' viii. 288; Herodotus i. 105; Pausanias iii. 23. § 1; Anacreon v. 9; Horace, ''Carmina'' i. 4. 5. Cythera was a stopping place for trade and culture between Crete and the Peloponesus, so these stories may preserve traces of the migration of Aphrodite's cult from the Middle East to mainland Greece.In the most famous version of her myth, her birth was the consequence of a castration: Cronus severed Uranus' genitals and threw them behind him into the sea. The foam from his genitals gave rise to Aphrodite (hence her name, meaning "foam-arisen"), while the Erinyes (furies), and the Meliae emerged from the drops of his blood. Hesiod states that the genitals "were carried over the sea a long time, and white foam arose from the immortal flesh; with it a girl grew." The girl, Aphrodite, floated ashore on a scallop shell. This iconic representation of Aphrodite as a mature "Venus rising from the sea" (''Venus Anadyomene''''Αναδυόμενη'' (''Anadyómenē''), "rising up".) was made famous in a much-admired painting by Apelles, now lost, but described in the ''Natural History'' of Pliny the Elder.File:Aphrodites Rock.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Petra tou Romiou ("The rock of the Greek"), Aphrodite's legendary birthplace in Paphos, Cyprus.In another version of her origin,''Iliad'' (BookV) she was considered a daughter of Zeus and Dione (Titaness/Oceanid)|Dione, the mother goddess whose oracle was at Dodona. Aphrodite herself was sometimes also referred to as "Dione". "Dione" seems to be a feminine form of "Dios", "of Zeus", the genitive form case of Zeus, and could be taken to mean simply "(she) that belongs to Zeus" in a generic sense. Aphrodite might, then, be an equivalent of Rhea, the Earth Mother, whom Homer relocated to Olympus.AdulthoodAphrodite is consistently portrayed, in every image and story, as having had no childhood, and instead being born as a nubile, infinitely desirable adult. She is often depicted nude. In many of the later myths, she is portrayed as vain, ill-tempered, and easily offended. Although she is married—she is one of the few gods in the Greek Pantheon who is—she is frequently unfaithful to her husband.According to one version of Aphrodite's story, because of her immense beauty Zeus fears that the other gods will become violent with each other in their rivalry to possess her. To forestall this, he forces her to marry Hephaestus, the dour, humorless god of smithing. In another version of the story, his mother, Hera casts him off Olympus, deeming him too ugly and deformed to inhabit the home of the gods. His revenge is to trap his mother in a magic throne. In return for her release, he demands to be given Aphrodite's hand in marriage.Hephaestus is overjoyed to be married to the goddess of beauty, and forges her beautiful jewelry, including the ''cestus'', a girdle that makes her even more irresistible to men. Her unhappiness with her marriage causes Aphrodite to seek other male companionship, most often Ares, but also sometimes Adonis.Aphrodite's husband Hephaestus is one of the most even-tempered of the Hellenic deities, but in the ''Odyssey'', she is portrayed as preferring Ares, the volatile god of war, because she is attracted to his violent nature.Aphrodite is a major figure in the Trojan War legend. She is a contestant in the "Judgement of Paris" (see below), which leads to the war. She had been the lover of the Trojan Anchises, and mother of his son Aeneas. Later, during the war, she saves Aeneas from Diomedes, who wounds her.AdonisAdonisFile:Titian (Tiziano Vecellio) (Italian - Venus and Adonis - Google Art Project.jpg|thumb|370px|''Venus and Adonis'' by Titian, ''circa'' 1554.The most prominent lover of Aphrodite is Adonis. He is the child of  Myrrha, cursed by Aphrodite with insatiable lust for her own father, King Cinyras of Cyprus, after Myrrha's mother bragged that her daughter is more beautiful than the goddess. Driven out after becoming pregnant, Myrrha is changed into a myrrh tree, but still gives birth to Adonis.Aphrodite finds the baby, and takes him to the underworld to be fostered by Persephone. She returns for him when he is grown and strikingly handsome, but Persephone wants to keep him. Zeus decrees that Adonis will spend a third of the year with Aphrodite, a third with Persephone, and a third with whomever he wishes. Adonis chooses Aphrodite, and they are constantly together.Adonis, who loves hunting, is slain by a wild boar. He bleeds to death, and Aphrodite can only mourn over his body. She causes anemones to grow wherever his blood fell, and decrees a festival on the anniversary of his death.The shade of Adonis is received in the underworld by Persephone. Aphrodite wants to return him to life. Again, she and Persephone bicker. Zeus intervenes again, decreeing that Adonis will spend six months with Aphrodite and six months with Persephone.The Judgement of ParisJudgement of ParisFile:Enrique Simonet - El Juicio de Paris - 1904.jpg|thumb|right||This painting shows Paris surveying Aphrodite naked, with the other two goddesses watching nearby. This is one of the numerous works that depict the event. (''El Juicio de Paris'' by Enrique Simonet, ''circa'' 1904)The gods are all invited to the marriage of Peleus and Thetis (the eventual parents of Achilles), except Eris, goddess of discord. In revenge, Eris makes a golden Apple of Discord inscribed ''kallistēi'' ("to the fairest one"), which she throws among the goddesses. Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena all claim it.Zeus delegates the choice to a mortal, Paris. The goddesses offer him bribes. Hera offers him supreme power, and Athena offers him wisdom, fame, and glory in battle. Aphrodite offers him Helen of Troy, the most beautiful mortal woman in the world, as a wife. As the goddess of desire, she causes Paris to become inflamed with desire for Helen at first sight,  and he awards the Apple to her. Helen is already married to King Menelaus of Sparta. The other two goddesses are enraged by this, and through Helen's abduction by Paris, they bring about the Trojan War.Consorts and children# Hephaestus# Ares## Phobos## Deimos## Harmonia## Adrestia (or Adrasteia (nymph) or Adrasteia (goddess))## The Erotes### Eros"eros"### Anteros### Himeros### Pothos# Poseidon## Rhode (possibly)# Hermes## Tyche (possibly)## Hermaphroditos# Dionysus## The Charites (Graces)### Thalia### Euphrosyne### Aglaea## Priapus (N.B. Some say that Adonis, not Dionysus was the father of Priapus)# Zeus## Tyche (possibly)#Adonis##Beroe##GolgosGraves70# Phaethon (son of Eos)## Astynoos# Anchises## Aeneas## Lyrus# Butes## Eryx#unknown father## Meligounis + several more unnamed daughtersHesychius of Alexandria s. v. Μελιγουνίς: "Meligounis: this is what the island Lipara was called. Also one of the daughters of Aphrodite."## PeithoOther mythsFile:Turtle Aphrodite AO20126 mp3h9188.jpg|thumb|''Aphrodite Ourania'', draped rather than nude, with her foot resting on a tortoise (Musée du Louvre)In one version of the legend of Hippolytus, Aphrodite is the cause of his death. He scorned the worship of Aphrodite, preferring Artemis. Aphrodite caused his stepmother, Phaedra, to fall in love with him, knowing Hippolytus would reject her. This led to Phaedra's suicide, and the death of Hippolytus.Glaucus of Corinth angered Aphrodite. During the chariot race at the funeral games of King Pelias, she drove his horses mad and they tore him apart.Hyginus, ''Fabulae'' 250.3, 273.11; Pausanias, ''Guide to Greece'' 6.20.19Polyphonte was a young woman who chose virginal life with Artemis instead of marriage and children, as favoured by Aphrodite. Aphrodite cursed her, causing her to have children by a bear. The resulting offspring, Agrius and Oreius, were wild cannibals who incurred the hatred of Zeus. Ultimately the whole family were transformed into birds and more specifically ill portents for mankind.Antoninus Liberalis, ''Metamorphoses'', 21Forms of AphroditeAphroditusFile:The Birth of Venus by William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1879).jpg|thumb|''The Birth of Venus'' by William-Adolphe Bouguereau, c. 1879By the late 5th century BC, certain philosophers had begun to draw a distinction between two separate "Aphrodites" (as opposed to a single Aphrodite whose characteristics varied slightly in different local cults of the goddess): ''Aphrodite Ourania'', the celestial Aphrodite, born from the sea foam after Cronus castrated Uranus, and ''Aphrodite Pandemos'', the common Aphrodite "of all the folk", born from the union of Zeus and Dione (Titaness/Oceanid)|Dione.E.g. Plato, ''Symposium'' 181a-d. Among the neo-Platonists and, later, their Christian interpreters, Aphrodite Ourania is associated with spiritual love, and Aphrodite Pandemos with physical love (desire). A representation of Aphrodite Ourania with her foot resting on a tortoise came to be seen as emblematic of discretion in conjugal love. (We know of this representation, said to have been a chryselephantine sculpture made by Phidias for Elis, only from a parenthetical comment by the geographer Pausanias).Pausanias, ''Periegesis'' vi.25.1; ''Aphrodite Pandemos'' was represented in the same temple riding on a goat, symbol of purely carnal rut: "The meaning of the tortoise and of the he-goat I leave to those who care to guess," Pausanias remarks. The image was taken up again after the Renaissance: see [Andrea Alciato, ''Emblemata / Les emblemes'' (1584)].In the ''Symposium'', of Plato, Pausanias (no relation to the geographer Pausanias) describes Aphrodite. He distinguishes two manifestations of Aphrodite, represented by the two stories of her creation. The older one, ''Aphrodite Ourania'' ("heavenly" Aphrodite), is the daughter of Uranus, and inspires homosexual male (and more specifically, ephebic) love/eros. The younger, ''Aphrodite Pandemos'' ("Common" Aphrodite) is the daughter of Zeus and Dione, and all love for women comes from her.Aphrodite is also known as Areia, showing her connection to Ares, the god of war, with whom she had extramarital relations.T.T. Kroon, art. Areia (1), in T.T. Kroon, ''Mythologisch Woordenboek'', ’s Gravenshage, 1875. As a result, she was, to some extent, made into a goddess of war. This is especially true in Sparta.Cult of Aphrodite:Category:Epithets of AphroditeThe epithet ''Aphrodite Acidalia'' was occasionally added to her name, after the spring she used for bathing, located in Boeotia (Virgil I, 720).  She was also called ''Kypris'' or ''Cytherea'' after her birth-places in Cyprus and Cythera, respectively, both centers of her cult. She was associated with Hesperia and frequently accompanied by the Oreads, nymphs of the mountains.Her festival, ''Aphrodisia'', was celebrated across Greece, but particularly in Athens and Corinth. At the temple of Aphrodite on the summit of Acrocorinth (before the Roman destruction of the city in 146 BC), intercourse with her priestesses was considered a method of worshiping Aphrodite. This temple was not rebuilt when the city was re-established under Roman rule in 44 BC, but the fertility rituals likely continued in the main city near the agora.Aphrodite was associated with, and often depicted with, the sea, dolphins, doves, swans, pomegranates, sceptres, apples, myrtle, rose trees, lime trees, clams, scallop shells, and pearls.One aspect of the cult of Aphrodite and her precedents that Thomas Bulfinch's much-reprinted ''The Age of Fable; or Stories of Gods and Heroes'' (1855 etc.) elided"Our work is not for the learned, nor for the theologian, nor for the philosopher, but for the reader of English literature, of either sex, who wishes to comprehend the allusions so frequently made by public speakers, lecturers, essayists, and poets, and those which occur in polite conversation." Bulfinch's obituary in the ''Boston Evening Standard'' noted that the contents were "expurgated of all that would be offensive". was the practice of ritual prostitution in her shrines and temples. The euphemism in Greek is ''hierodoule'', "sacred slave." The practice was an inherent part of the rituals owed to Aphrodite's Near Eastern forebears, Sumerian Inanna and Akkadian Ishtar, whose temple priestesses were the "women of Ishtar," ''ishtaritum''.Miroslav Marcovich, "From Ishtar to Aphrodite" ''Journal of Aesthetic Education'' '''30'''.2, Special Issue: Distinguished Humanities Lectures II (Summer 1996) p 49.The practice has been documented in Babylon, Syria, and Palestine, in Phoenician cities and the Tyrian colony Carthage, and for Hellenic Aphrodite in Cyprus, the center of her cult, Cythera, Corinth, and in Sicily (Marcovich 1996:49); the practice however is not attested in Athens. Aphrodite was everywhere the patroness of the ''hetaera'' and courtesan. In Ionia on the coast of Asia Minor, ''hierodoulai'' served in the temple of Artemis.Modern worship of AphroditeAs one of the Twelve Olympians of the Greek pantheon and thus a major deity, worship of Aphrodite, (or ''Aphrodíti''), as a living goddess is one of the more prominent devotionals in ''Hellenismos'' (Hellenic Polytheistic Reconstructionism), the revival of ancient Greek religious practices in the present day.[Hellenic Polytheism: Following the Ways of the Ancient Greeks;;]Hellenic polytheists of today celebrate their religious devotion to Aphrodite on two annual and monthly festival days.  Aphrodisia is her main festival day, which is celebrated on the 4th day of ''Hekatombaion'' in the Attic calendar, falling in the months of July and August in the Gregorian calendar, depending on the year. Adonia, a joint festival of Aphrodite and her partner Adonis, is celebrated on the first full moon following the Northern spring equinox, often roughly as the same week the Christian festival of Easter is celebrated. The fourth day of each month is considered a sacred day of both Aphrodite and her son Eros.[Aphrodite;;]Devotional offerings to Aphrodite can include incense, fruit (particularly apples and pomegranates), flowers (particularly fragrant roses), sweet dessert wine (particularly ''Commandaria'' wine from Cyprus), and cakes made with honey.[Offerings to the Gods;;][Aphrodite | Sacred Haven Coven;;]Comparative mythologyAncient Near Eastern parallelsThe religions of the ancient Near East have a number of love goddesses that may be similar to certain aspects of Aphrodite.Her cult in Greece was imported from, or influenced by, the cult of Astarte in Phoenicia.Hans Georg Wunderlich further connects Aphrodite with the Minoan snake goddess.The Egyptian snake goddess Wadjet was associated with the city known to the Greeks as ''Aphroditopolis'' (the city of Aphrodite).C.L. Whitcombe.''Minoan snake goddess''.8.''Snakes, Egypt magic and women''.[Minoan Snake Goddess]Pausanias states the first to establish a cult of Aphrodite were the Assyrians, after the Assyrians, the Paphians of Cyprus, and then the Phoenicians at Ascalon. The Phoenicians, in turn, taught her worship to the people of Cythera.Pausanias, Description of Greece,An origin of (or significant influence on) the Greek love goddess from Near Eastern traditions was seen with some skepticism in classical 19th century scholarship. Authors such as A. Enmann (''Kypros und der Ursprung des Aphroditekultes'' 1881) attempted to portray the cult of Aphrodite as a native Greek development.Scholarly opinion on this question has shifted significantly since the 1980s, notably due to Walter Burkert (1984), and the significant influence of the Near East on early Greek religion in general (and on the cult of Aphrodite in particular) is now widely recognized as dating to a period of orientalization during the 8th century BC, when archaic Greece was on the fringes of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.In native Greek tradition, the planet Venus had two names, ''Hesperos'' as the evening star and ''Eosphoros'' as the morning star. The Greeks adopted the identification of the morning and the evening stars, as well as its identification as Ishtar/Aphrodite, during the 4th century BC, along with other items of Babylonian astrology, such as the zodiac (Eudoxus of Cnidus).Comparison with the Indo-European dawn goddessIt has long been accepted in comparative mythology that Aphrodite (regardless of possible oriental influences) preserves some aspects of the Indo-European dawn goddess Hausos|*Hausos (properly Greek Eos, Latin  Aurora, Sanskrit Ushas).Dumézil, ''Ouranos-Vàruna:Ètude de mythologie compáree indo-européene''. Paris: Maisonneuve. 1934Janda (2010) etymologizes her name as "she who rises from the foam [of the ocean]" and points to Hesiod's ''Theogony'' account of Aphrodite's birth as an archaic reflex of Indo-European myth.  Aphrodite rising out of the waters after Cronus defeats Uranus as a mytheme  would then be directly cognate to the Rigvedic myth of Indra defeating Vrtra, liberating Ushas."Janda"GalleryFile:CallipygianVenus.jpg|''The Venus Kallipygos.'' ''Aphrodite Kallipygos'' ("Aphrodite of the Beautiful Buttocks"),The word callipygian is defined as "having shapely buttocks" by Merriam-Webster. is a type of nude female statue of the Hellenistic era. It depicts a partially draped womanConventionally presumed to be Venus, though it may equally be a portrait of a mortal woman, such as a hetaira, or an image of the goddess modeled on one such raising her light peplosThe gesture of Aphrodite/Venus lifting the robe symbolized religious initiation and the ancient Greeks worshiped the woman's "rich" buttocks to obtain great wealth on earth as the two Syracusan sisters who inspired the Kallipygos idea had accomplished. to uncover her hips and buttocks, and looking back and down over her shoulder, perhaps to evaluate themFile:Cnidus Aphrodite Altemps Inv8619.jpg|The Ludovisi ''Cnidian Aphrodite'', Roman marble copy (torso and thighs) with restored head, arms, legs and drapery support. The ''Aphrodite of Cnidus'' was one of the most famous works of the Attic sculptor Praxiteles (4th century BC).File:Venere di Milo 02.JPG|''Aphrodite of Milos'' (c.100 BC), LouvreFile:Venus pudica Massimo.jpg|''Aphrodite of Menophantos'' a Venus Pudica signed by Menophantos, 1st century BC, found at San Gregorio al Celio, Rome (Museo Nazionale Romano), of the Capitoline Venus type.File:Aphrodite fountain.jpg|''Fountain of Aphrodite in Mexico City.File:Aphrodite Heyl (2).jpg|''Aphrodite Heyl'', terracotta statuette of very high quality, probably from Myrina, 2nd century BCFile:Aphrodite Anadyomene from Pompeii cropped.jpg|The Venus Anadyomene, from Pompeii, believed to be a copy of a lost work by Apelles.File:Ludovisi throne Altemps Inv8570.jpg|The Ludovisi Throne (460 BC?) is believed to be a classical Greek bas-relief, although it has also been alleged to be a 19th-century forgeryFile:Venus redon.jpeg|''The Birth of Venus'' (1912), by Odilon Redon.File:Aphrodite swan BM D2.jpg|Aphrodite riding a swan: Attic white-ground red-figured ''kylix'', c. 460, found at Kameiros (Rhodes).See alsoGreek mythologyHellenismosReferences and sources;References;Sources* C. Kerényi (1951). ''The Gods of the Greeks''.* Walter Burkert (1985). ''Greek Religion'' (Harvard University Press).External linksAphrodite*[Theoi Project, Aphrodite] information from classical literature, Greek and Roman art*[The Glory which Was Greece from a Female Perspective]*`