Inter-Varsity Press'''Apollos''' () was a 1st century Alexandrian Jewish Christian mentioned several times in the New Testament. A contemporary of Paul the Apostle, he played an important role in the early development of the churches of Ephesus and Corinth.Biblical accountApollos is first mentioned as a Christian preacher who had come to Ephesus (probably in the year 52-3), where he is described as "being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John" (18:24-25). Priscilla and Aquila, a Jewish Christian couple who had come to Ephesus with the Apostle Paul, instructed Apollos::"When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained to him the way of God more adequately."18:26The differences between the two understandings probably related to baptism with the Holy Spirit, since Apollos "knew only the baptism of John". Later, during Apollos' absence, recounts an encounter between Paul and some disciples at Ephesus:Before Paul's arrival, Apollos had moved from Ephesus to Achaia18:27 So the Alexandrian recension; the text in Papyrus 38|\mathfrak{P}38 and Codex Bezae indicate that Apollos went to Corinth. Joseph Fitzmyer, ''The Acts of the Apostles'' (New York: Doubleday, 1998), p. 639. and was living in Corinth, the provincial capital of Achaia.19:1 Acts reports that Apollos arrived in Achaia with a letter of recommendation from the Ephesian Christians and "greatly helped those who through grace had believed, for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, showing by the Scriptures that the Christ was Jesus (18:27-28).Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (55 AD) mentions Apollos as an important figure at Corinth. Paul described Apollos' role at Corinth: "I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth."3:6 Paul's Epistle refers to a schism between four parties in the Corinthian church, of which two attached themselves to Paul and Apollos respectively, using their names (the third and fourth were Peter, identified as Cephas, and Jesus Christ himself).1:10-13It is possible, though, that, as Msgr. Ronald Knox assumes, the parties were actually two, one claiming to follow Paul, the other claiming to follow Apollos. "It is surely probable that the adherents of St. Paul [...] alleged in defence of his orthodoxy the fact that he was in full agreement with, and in some sense commissioned by, the Apostolic College. Hence 'I am for Cephas'. [...] What reply was the faction of Apollos to make? It devised an expedient which has been imitated by sectaries more than once in later times; appealed behind the Apostolic College itself to him from whom the Apostolic College derived its dignity; 'I am for Christ.'" (R. Knox, ''Enthusiasm'', p. 13) There is no indication that Apollos favored or approved an overestimation of his person. Paul urged him to go to Corinth at the time, but Apollos refused, stating that he would come later when he had an opportunity.16:12Apollos is mentioned one more time in the New Testament. In the Epistle to Titus, the recipient is exhorted to "speed Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way".3:13Extrabiblical informationJerome states that Apollos was so dissatisfied with the division at Corinth, that he retired to Crete with Zenas the lawyer; and that the schism having been healed by Paul's letters to the Corinthians, Apollos returned to the city, and became one of its elders.Jerome, Commentary on the Epistle to Titus 3:13 Less probable traditions assign to him the bishop of Duras, or of Iconium in Phrygia, or of Caesarea.SignificanceMartin Luther and some modern scholars have proposed Apollos as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, rather than Paul or Barnabas. Both Apollos and Barnabas were Jewish Christians with sufficient intellectual authority.''The NIV study bible, new international version''; English (UK) edition; London, Hodder ; Stoughton, 1987; p.1817.  Other than this, there are no known surviving texts attributed to Apollos.The Pulpit Commentary describes him as 'a very remarkable man' and recognises 'St. Paul's high esteem for him'.Apollos' origin in Alexandria has led to speculations that he would have preached in the allegorical style of Philo. Theologian Jerome Murphy-O'Connor, for example, commented: "It is difficult to imagine that an Alexandrian Jew ... could have escaped the influence of Philo, the great intellectual leader ... particularly since the latter seems to have been especially concerned with education and preaching."Apollos is regarded as a saint by several Christian churches, including the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, which hold a commemoration for him, together with saints Aquila and Priscilla, on 13 February.NotesReferencesEastern Christianity* Articles in** ''Encyclopaedia Biblica''** Herzog-Hauck, ''Realencyklopadie''** ''The Jewish Encyclopedia'' ()* ''Jerome''* James Hastings, ''Dictionary of the Bible''* Karl Heinrich von Weizsäcker, ''Das apostolische Zeitalter'' (1886)* A. C. McGiffert, ''History of Christianity in the Apostolic Age''.* ''Initial text from Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religion''*