'''Aquaculture''', also known as '''aquafarming''', is the farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, molluscs and aquatic plants.[Environmental Impact of Aquaculture] Aquaculture involves cultivating freshwater and saltwater populations under controlled conditions, and can be contrasted with commercial fishing, which is the harvesting of wild fish. Broadly speaking, the relation of aquaculture to finfish and shellfish fisheries is analogous to the relation of agriculture to hunting and gathering. Mariculture refers to aquaculture practiced in marine environments and in underwater habitats.According to the FAO, aquaculture "is understood to mean the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated." Fishery Statistical Collections, FAO, Rome. Retrieved 2 October 2011. The reported output from global aquaculture operations would supply one half of the fish and shellfish that is directly consumed by humans;[Half Of Fish Consumed Globally Is Now Raised On Farms, Study Finds] ''Science Daily'', September 8, 2009. however, there are issues about the reliability of the reported figures.overreportingFurther, in current aquaculture practice, products from several pounds of wild fish are used to produce one pound of a piscivorous fish like salmon."Alliance"Particular kinds of aquaculture include fish farming, shrimp farming, oyster farming, mariculture, algaculture (such as seaweed farming), and the cultivation of ornamental fish. Particular methods include aquaponics and integrated multi-trophic aquaculture, both of which integrate fish farming and plant farming.HistoryFile:Delta Pride Catfish farm harvest.jpg|thumb|left|Workers harvest catfish from the Delta Pride Catfish farms in Mississippi|alt=Photo of dripping, cup-shaped net, approximately m in diameter and equally tall, half full of fish, suspended from crane boom, with 4 workers on and around larger, ring-shaped structure in waterThe indigenous Gunditjmara people in Victoria, Australia, may have raised eels as early as 6000BC. There is evidence that they developed about sqmi of volcanic floodplains in the vicinity of Lake Condah into a complex of channels and dams, and used woven traps to capture eels, and preserve them to eat all year round.[Aborigines may have farmed eels, built huts] ABC Science News, 13 March 2003.[Lake Condah Sustainability Project]. Retrieved 18 February 2010.Aquaculture was operating in China circa 2500BC. When the waters subsided after river floods, some fishes, mainly carp, were trapped in lakes. Early aquaculturists fed their brood using nymphs and silkworm feces, and ate them. A fortunate genetic mutation of carp led to the emergence of goldfish during the Tang Dynasty.Japanese cultivated seaweed by providing bamboo poles and, later, nets and oyster shells to serve as anchoring surfaces for spores.Romans bred fish in ponds and farmed oysters in coastal lagoons before 100 CE.In central Europe, early Christian monasteries adopted Roman aquacultural practices.Jhingran, V.G., Introduction to aquaculture. 1987, United Nations Development Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research. Aquaculture spread in Europe during the Middle Ages since away from the seacoasts and the big rivers fish had to be salted so they did not rot. Improvements in transportation during the 19th century made fresh fish easily available and inexpensive, even in inland areas, making aquaculture less popular. The 15th Century fishponds of the Třeboň|Trebon Basin in the Czech Republic are maintained as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.Hawaiians constructed oceanic fish ponds (see Hawaiian aquaculture). A remarkable example is a fish pond dating from at least 1,000years ago, at Alekoko. Legend says that it was constructed by the mythical Menehune dwarf people.Costa-Pierce, B.A., (1987) Aquaculture in ancient Hawaii. Bioscience 37(5):320-331.In first half of 18th century German Stephan Ludwig Jacobi experimented with external fertilization of brown trouts and salmons. He wrote an article ''"Von der künstlichen Erzeugung der Forellen und Lachse".''  By the latter decades of the 18th Century, oyster farming had begun in estuaries along the Atlantic Coast of North America.The word aquaculture appeared in an 1855 newspaper article in reference to the harvesting of ice. It also appeared in descriptions of the terrestrial agricultural practise of subirrigation in the late 19th century before becoming associated primarily with the cultivation of aquatic plant and animal species.In 1859, Stephen Ainsworth of West Bloomfield, New York, began experiments with brook trout. By 1864, Seth Green had established a commercial fish hatching operation at Caledonia Springs, near Rochester, New York. By 1866, with the involvement of Dr. W. W. Fletcher of Concord, Massachusetts, artificial fish hatcheries were under way in both Canada and the United States.Milner, James W. (1874). "The Progress of Fish-culture in the United States". United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries Report of the Commissioner for 1872 and 1873. 535 – 544 ;When the Dildo Island fish hatchery opened in Newfoundland in 1889, it was the largest and most advanced in the world. The word aquaculture was used in descriptions of the hatcheries experiments with cod and lobster in 1890.By the 1920s, the American Fish Culture Company of Carolina, Rhode Island founded in the 1870s was one of the leading producers of trout.  During the 1940s, they had perfected the method of manipulating the day and night cycle of fish so that they could be artificially spawned year around.Rice, M.A. 2010. A brief history of the American Fish Culture Company 1877-1997. Rhode Island History 68(1):20-35.Californians harvested wild kelp and attempted to manage supply circa 1900, later labeling it a wartime resource.Peter Neushul, Seaweed for War: California's World War I kelp industry, Technology and Culture 30 (July 1989), 561-583.21st-century practiceHarvest stagnation in wild fisheries and overexploitation of popular marine species, combined with a growing demand for high quality protein, encouraged aquaculturists to domesticate other marine species."'FAO: 'Fish farming is the way forward.'(Big Picture)(Food and Agriculture Administration's 'State of Fisheries and Aquaculture' report)." The Ecologist 39.4 (2009): 8-9. Gale Expanded Academic ASAP. Web. 1  October 2009. ;Case for Fish and Oyster Farming]," Carl Marziali, University of Southern California Trojan Family Magazine, May 17, 2009. At the outset of modern aquaculture, many were optimistic that a "Blue Revolution" could take place in aquaculture, just as the Green Revolution of the 20th century had revolutionized agriculture."The Economist: 'The promise of a blue revolution', Aug. 7, 2003. ;Although land animals had long been domesticated, most seafood were still caught from the wild. Concerned about the impact of growing demand for seafood on the world's oceans, prominent ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau wrote in 1973: "With earth’s burgeoning human populations to feed, we must turn to the sea with new understanding and new technology.”"Jacques Cousteau, ''The Ocean World of Jacques Cousteau: The Act of life'', World Pub: 1973."About 430 (97%) of the species cultured as of 2007 were domesticated during the 20th and 21st centuries, of which an estimated 106 came in the decade to 2007. Given the long-term importance of agriculture, it is interesting to note that to date only 0.08% of known land plant species and 0.0002% of known land animal species have been domesticated, compared with 0.17% of known marine plant species and 0.13% of known marine animal species. Domestication typically involves about a decade of scientific research. Domesticating aquatic species involves fewer risks to humans than do land animals, which took a large toll in human lives. Most major human diseases originated in domesticated animals, including diseases such as smallpox and diphtheria, that like most infectious diseases, move to humans from animals. No human pathogens of comparable virulence have yet emerged from marine species.Biological control methods to manage parasites are already being used such as cleaner fish (e.g. lumpsuckers and wrasse) to control sea lice populations in salmon farming. Models are being used to help with spatial planning and siting of fish farms in order to minimize impact.The decline in wild fish stocks has increased the demand for farmed fish. However, it is necessary to find alternative sources of protein and oil for fish feed so the aquaculture industry can grow sustainably; otherwise it represents a great risk for the over-exploitation of forage fish.Another recent issue following the banning in 2008 of organotins by the IMO (International Maritime Organization) is the need to find environmentally friendly, but still effective, compounds with antifouling effects.Many new natural compounds are discovered every year, but it is almost impossible to produce them on a large enough scale for commercial purposes.It’s highly probable that future developments in this field will rely on microorganisms, but greater funding and further research is needed to overcome the lack of knowledge in this field.Species groupsAquatic plantsCultivating emergent aquatic plants in floating containersSeaweed farmingMicroalgae, also referred to as phytoplankton, microphytes, or planktonic algae constitute the majority of cultivated algae.Macroalgae, commonly known as seaweed, also have many commercial and industrial uses, but due to their size and specific requirements, they are not easily cultivated on a large scale and are most often taken in the wild.FishFish farmingThe farming of fish is the most common form of aquaculture. It involves raising fish commercially in tanks, ponds, or ocean enclosures, usually for food. A facility that releases juvenile fish into the wild for recreational fishing or to supplement a species' natural numbers is generally referred to as a fish hatchery. Worldwide, the most important fish species used in fish farming are, in order, carp, salmon, tilapia and catfish."faostat"In the Mediterranean, young bluefin tuna are netted at sea and towed slowly towards the shore. They are then interned in offshore pens where they are further grown for the market. In 2009, researchers in Australia managed for the first time to coax tuna (Southern bluefin) to breed in landlocked tanks. Southern bluefin tuna are also caught in the wild and fattened in grow-out sea cages in southern Spencer Gulf, South Australia.A similar process is used in the salmon farming section of this industry; juveniles are taken from hatcheries and a variety of methods are used to aid them in their maturation. For example, as stated above, one of the most important fish species in the industry, the salmon, can be grown using a cage system. This is done by having netted cages, preferably in open water that has a strong flow, and feeding the salmon a special food mixture that will aid in their growth. This process allows for year-round growth of the fish, and thus a higher harvest during the correct seasons.CrustaceansFreshwater prawn farmCommercial shrimp farming began in the 1970s, and production grew steeply thereafter. Global production reached more than 1.6 million tonnes in 2003, worth about 9 billion U.S. dollars. About 75% of farmed shrimp is produced in Asia, in particular in China and Thailand. The other 25% is produced mainly in Latin America, where Brazil is the largest producer. Thailand is the largest exporter.Shrimp farming has changed from its traditional, small-scale form in Southeast Asia into a global industry. Technological advances have led to ever higher densities per unit area, and broodstock is shipped worldwide. Virtually all farmed shrimp are penaeids (i.e., shrimp of the family ''Penaeidae''), and just two species of shrimp, the Pacific white shrimp and the giant tiger prawn, account for about 80% of all farmed shrimp. These industrial monocultures are very susceptible to disease, which has decimated shrimp populations across entire regions. Increasing ecological problems, repeated disease outbreaks, and pressure and criticism from both NGOs and consumer countries led to changes in the industry in the late 1990s and generally stronger regulations. In 1999, governments, industry representatives, and environmental organizations initiated a program aimed at developing and promoting more sustainable farming practices through the Seafood Watch program.Freshwater prawn farming shares many characteristics with, including many problems with, marine shrimp farming. Unique problems are introduced by the developmental life cycle of the main species, the giant river prawn.New, M. B.: ''[Farming Freshwater Prawns]''; FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 428, 2002. ISSN 0429-9345.The global annual production of freshwater prawns (excluding crayfish and crabs) in 2003 was about 280,000 tonnes of which China produced 180,000 tonnes followed by India and Thailand with 35,000 tonnes each. Additionally, China produced about 370,000 tonnes of Chinese river crab.Data extracted from the  for freshwater crustaceans. The most recent data sets are for 2003 and sometimes contain estimates. Retrieved June 28, 2005.MolluscsAbalone farmGeoduck aquacultureAquacultured shellfish include various oyster, mussel and  clam species. These bivalves are filter and/or deposit feeders, which rely on ambient primary production rather than inputs of fish or other feed. As such shellfish aquaculture is generally perceived as benign or even beneficial.Burkholder, J.M. and S.E. Shumway. 2011. Bivalve shellfish aquaculture and eutrophication. In, Shellfish Aquaculture and the Environment. Ed. S.E. Shumway. John Wiley ; Sons. Depending on the species and local conditions, bivalve molluscs are either grown on the beach, on longlines, or suspended from rafts and harvested by hand or by dredging. Abalone farming began in the late 1950s and early 1960s in Japan and China. Since the mid-1990s, this industry has become increasingly successful. Over-fishing and poaching have reduced wild populations to the extent that farmed abalone now supplies most abalone meat. Sustainably farmed molluscs can be certified by Seafood Watch and other organizations, including the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). WWF initiated the "Aquaculture Dialogues" in 2004 to develop measurable and performance-based standards for responsibly farmed seafood. In 2009, WWF co-founded the Aquaculture Stewardship Council with the Dutch Sustainable Trade Initiative (IDH) to manage the global standards and certification programs.Other groupsOther groups include aquatic reptiles, amphibians, and miscellaneous invertebrates, such as echinoderms and jellyfish. They are separately graphed at the top right of this section, since they do not contribute enough volume to show clearly on the main graph.Commercially harvested echinoderms include sea cucumbers and sea urchins. In China, sea cucumbers are farmed in artificial ponds as large as acre.Around the worldAquaculture by country; also here: --;Optimal stocking density is often defined by the carrying capacity of the stocked environment and the amount of individual space needed by the fish, which is very species specific. Although behavioural interactions such as shoaling may mean that high stocking densities are beneficial to some species,"Hastein"Ashley, P.J. (2006) Fish welfare: Current issues in aquaculture. Applied Animal Behaviour Science,  in many cultured species high stocking densities may be of concern. Crowding can constrain normal swimming behaviour, as well as increase aggressive and competitive behaviours such as cannibalism, feed competition, territoriality and dominance/subordination hierarchies."Ellis"This potentially increases the risk of tissue damage due to abrasion from fish-to-fish contact or fish-to-cage contact."Hastein"Fish can suffer reductions in food intake and food conversion efficiency. In addition, high stocking densities can result in water flow being insufficient, creating inadequate oxygen supply and waste product removal."Ashley"Dissolved oxygen is essential for fish respiration and concentrations below critical levels can induce stress and even lead to asphyxiation."Ellis"Ammonia, a nitrogen excretion product, is highly toxic to fish at accumulated levels, particularly when oxygen concentrations are low.Many of these interactions and effects cause stress in the fish, which can be a major factor in facilitating fish disease."Conte"For many parasites, infestation depends on the host's degree of mobility, the density of the host population and vulnerability of the host's defence system. Sea lice are the primary parasitic problem for finfish in aquaculture, high numbers causing widespread skin erosion and haemorrhaging, gill congestion,and increased mucus production. There are also a number of prominent viral and bacterial pathogens that can have severe effects on internal organs and nervous systems.Improving welfareThe key to improving welfare of marine cultured organisms is to reduce stress to a minimum, as prolonged or repeated stress can cause a range of adverse effects. Attempts to minimise stress can occur throughout the culture process. During grow out it is important to keep stocking densities at appropriate levels specific to each species, as well as separating size classes and grading to reduce aggressive behavioural interactions. Keeping nets and cages clean can assist positive water flow to reduce the risk of water degradation.Not surprisingly disease and parasitism can have a major effect on fish welfare and it is important for farmers not only to manage infected stock but also to apply disease prevention measures. However, prevention methods, such as vaccination, can also induce stress because of the extra handling and injection."Ashley"Other methods include adding antibiotics to feed, adding chemicals into water for treatment baths and biological control, such as using cleaner wrasse to remove lice from farmed salmon."Ashley"Many steps are involved in transport, including capture, food deprivation to reduce faecal contamination of transport water, transfer to transport vehicle via nets or pumps, plus transport and transfer to the delivery location. During transport water needs to be maintained to a high quality, with regulated temperature, sufficient oxygen and minimal waste products."Conte""Ashley"In some cases anaesthetics may be used in small doses to calm fish before transport."Ashley"Aquaculture is sometimes part of an environmental rehabilitation program or as an aid in conserving endangered species.ProspectsGlobal wild fisheries are in decline, with valuable habitat such as estuaries in critical condition. The aquaculture or farming of piscivorous fish, like salmon, does not help the problem because they need to eat products from other fish, such as fish meal and fish oil. Studies have shown that salmon farming has major negative impacts on wild salmon, as well as the forage fish that need to be caught to feed them.Knapp G, Roheim CA and Anderson JL (2007)  World Wildlife Fund. ISBN 978-0-89164-175-9 Fish that are higher on the food chain are less efficient sources of food energy.Apart from fish and shrimp, some aquaculture undertakings, such as seaweed and filter-feeding bivalve mollusks like oysters, clams, mussels and scallops, are relatively benign and even environmentally restorative."uscnews.usc.edu"Filter-feeders filter pollutants as well as nutrients from the water, improving water quality. Seaweeds extract nutrients such as inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus directly from the water,"Chopin et al. 2001"and filter-feeding mollusks can extract nutrients as they feed on particulates, such as phytoplankton and detritus.Some profitable aquaculture cooperatives promote sustainable practices. New methods lessen the risk of biological and chemical pollution through minimizing fish stress, fallowing netpens, and applying Integrated Pest Management. Vaccines are being used more and more to reduce antibiotic use for disease control.Onshore recirculating aquaculture systems, facilities using polyculture techniques, and properly sited facilities (for example, offshore areas with strong currents) are examples of ways to manage negative environmental effects.Recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS) recycle water by circulating it through filters to remove fish waste and food and then recirculating it back into the tanks.  This saves water and the waste gathered can be used in compost or, in some cases, could even be treated and used on land. While RAS was developed with freshwater fish in mind, scientist associated with the Agricultural Research Service have found a way to rear saltwater fish using RAS in low-salinity waters."Growing Premium Seafood-Inland!"; Although saltwater fish are raised in off-shore cages or caught with nets in water that typically has a salinity of 35 parts per thousand (ppt), scientists were able to produce healthy pompano, a saltwater fish, in tanks with a salinity of only 5 ppt. Commercializing low-salinity RAS are predicted to have positive environmental and economical effects. Unwanted nutrients from the fish food would not be added to the ocean and the risk of transmitting diseases between wild and farm-raised fish would greatly be reduced. The price of expensive saltwater fish, such as the pompano and combia used in the experiments, would be reduced. However, before any of this can be done researchers must study every aspect of the fish's lifecycle, including the amount of ammonia and nitrate the fish will tolerate in the water, what to feed the fish during each stage of its lifecycle, the stocking rate that will produce the healthiest fish, etc."Growing Premium Seafood-Inland!"Some 16 countries now use geothermal energy for aquaculture, including China, Israel, and the United States. in Lester R. Brown, ''Plan B 2.0 Rescuing a Planet Under Stress and a Civilization in Trouble'' (NY: W.W. Norton ; Co., 2006), p. 199.  In California, for example, 15 fish farms produce tilapia, bass, and catfish with warm water from underground. This warmer water enables fish to grow all year round and mature more quickly. Collectively these California farms produce 4.5 million kilograms of fish each year."earth-policy"See also==;;Marine life* Agroecology* Alligator farm* Aquaponics* Copper alloys in aquaculture* Fish hatchery* Fisheries science* Industrial aquaculture* List of harvested aquatic animals by weight*Recirculating aquaculture system'''Aquaculture by Country:'''*Aquaculture in Australia*Aquaculture in Canada*Aquaculture in Chile*Aquaculture in China*Aquaculture in East Timor*Aquaculture in the Federated States of Micronesia*Aquaculture in Fiji*Aquaculture in Indonesia*Aquaculture in Kiribati*Aquaculture in the Marshall Islands*Aquaculture in Nauru*Aquaculture in New Zealand*Aquaculture in Palau*Aquaculture in Papua New Guinea*Aquaculture in Samoa*Aquaculture in the Solomon Islands*Aquaculture in South Africa*Aquaculture in South Korea*Aquaculture in Tonga*Aquaculture in Tuvalu*Aquaculture in VanuatuNotesReferences2* Corpron, K.E., Armstrong, D.A., 1983. Removal of nitrogen by an aquatic plant, ''Elodea densa'', in recirculating ''Macrobrachium'' culture systems. Aquaculture 32, 347-360.* Duarte, Carlos M; Marbá, Nùria and Holmer, Marianne (2007) ''Rapid Domestication of Marine Species.'' Science. Vol 316, no 5823, pp 382–383. [podcast]* GESAMP (2008) [''Assessment and communication of environmental risks in coastal aquaculture''] FAO Reports and Studies No 76. ISBN 978-92-5-105947-0* Hepburn, J. 2002. ''Taking Aquaculture Seriously''. Organic Farming, Winter 2002 © Soil Association.* Naylor, R.L., S.L. Williams, and D.R. Strong. 2001. ''Aquaculture – A Gateway For Exotic Species''. Science, 294: 1655-6.* Higginbotham James ''Piscinae: Artificial Fishponds in Roman Italy'' University of North Carolina Press (June 1997)* Wyban, Carol Araki (1992) ''Tide and Current: Fishponds of Hawai'I'' University of Hawaii Press:: ISBN 978-0-8248-1396-3* Timmons, M.B., Ebeling, J.M., Wheaton, F.W., Summerfelt, S.T., Vinci, B.J., 2002. Recirculating Aquaculture Systems: 2nd edition. Cayuga Aqua Ventures.* Piedrahita, R.H., 2003. Reducing the potential environmental impacts of tank aquaculture effluents through intensification and recirculation. Aquaculture 226, 35-44.* Klas, S., Mozes, N., Lahav, O., 2006. Development of a single-sludge denitrification method for nitrate removal from RAS effluents: Lab-scale results vs. model prediction. Aquaculture 259, 342-353.Further reading** ''AquaLingua'' ISBN 978-82-529-2389-6* Stickney, Robert (2009)  CABI. ISBN 978-1-84593-589-4.* Nash, Colin (2011)  John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-8138-2163-4.**External linksAquaculture***