island chainsThe Mergui Archipelago in Burma (Myanmar).File:Ksamil Islets.jpg|thumb|The Ksamil Archipelago in Albania.File:Fernando noronha.jpg|thumb|The archipelago of Fernando de Noronha in Brazil.An '''archipelago''' ( ), sometimes called an '''island group''' or '''island chain''', is a chain, cluster or collection of islands. The word ''archipelago'' is derived from the Greek ''ἄρχι- – arkhi-'' ("chief") and ''πέλαγος – pélagos'' ("sea") through the Italian ''arcipelago''. In Italian, possibly following a tradition of antiquity, the '''''Arcipelago''''' (from medieval Greek ''Linguistic reconstruction|*ἀρχιπέλαγος'' and Latin ''archipelagus'') was the proper name for the Aegean Sea and, later, usage shifted to refer to the Aegean Islands (since the sea is remarkable for its large number of islands). It is now used to refer to any island group or, sometimes, to a sea containing a small number of scattered islands.TypesArchipelagos may be found isolated in bodies of water or neighboring a large land mass. For example, Scotland has more than 700 islands surrounding its mainland which constitute an archipelago. Archipelagos are often volcanic, forming along island arcs generated by subduction zones or hotspots, but may also be the result of erosion, deposition, and land elevation. Depending on their geological origin, islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as ''oceanic islands'', ''continental fragments'', and ''continental islands''.Whittaker R. J. ; Fernández-Palacios J. M. (2007) ''Island Biogeography: Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation''. New York, Oxford University Press Oceanic islands are mainly of volcanic origin. Continental fragments correspond to land masses that have separated from a continental mass due to tectonic displacement. Finally, sets of islands formed close to the coast of a continent are considered continental archipelagos when they form part of the same continental shelf so islands are just exposed continental shelf.Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, New Zealand, The British Isles, The Bahamas, Greece, Hawaii, Azores and New York City are examples of well-known archipelagos. The largest archipelagic state in the world by area and population is Indonesia. The archipelago with the most islands is the Swedish East Coast Archipelago, which contains the Stockholm Archipelago, which, in turn, connects to the world's second largest archipelago, the Archipelago Sea in Finland.List of archipelagos by number of islandsSee alsoIslands* Island arc* Geography* Earth science* Geomorphology* List of landforms* Plate tectonics* Island country* Earthsea* The World (archipelago)* List of archipelagos by number of islands* List of archipelagos* List of islandsReferencesExternal linksArchipelagoes*