File:Asado 2005.jpg|thumb|Typical Argentine Asado (grill).'''Argentine cuisine''' may be described as a cultural blending of Indigenous, Mediterranean influences (such as those created by Italian and Spanish populations) within the wide scope of livestock and agricultural products that are abundant in the country. Argentine annual consumption of beef has averaged 100kg (220lbs) per capita, approaching 180kg (396lbs) per capita during the 19th century; consumption averaged 67.7kg (149lbs) in 2007. Beyond ''asado'' (the Argentine barbecue), no other dish more genuinely matches the national identity. Nevertheless, the country's vast area, and its cultural diversity, have led to a local cuisine of various dishes. The great immigratory waves consequently imprinted a large influence in the Argentine cuisine, after all Argentina was the second country in the world with the most immigrants with 6.6 million, only second to the United States with 27 million, and ahead of other immigratory receptor countries such as Canada, Brazil, Australia, etc.Argentine people have a reputation for their love of eating.":0"Social gatherings are commonly centered on sharing a meal. Invitations to have dinner at home is generally viewed as a symbol of friendship, warmth, and integration. Sunday family lunch is considered the most significant meal of the week, whose highlights often include asado or pasta.":0"Another feature of Argentine cuisine is the preparation of homemade food such as french fries, patties, and pasta to celebrate a special occasion, to meet friends, or to honor someone. The tradition of locally preparing food is passed down from generation to generation, and homemade food is also seen as a way to show affection.":0"Argentine restaurants include a great variety of cuisines, prices, and flavors. Large cities tend to host everything from high-end international cuisine, to ''bodegones'' (inexpensive traditional hidden taverns), less stylish restaurants, and bars and canteens offering a range of dishes at affordable prices.":0"HistoryHistory of Argentine cuisineNative Americans lived in Argentina thousands of years before the European explorers arrived. Members of an Indian tribe in the southern part of Argentina were farmers who grew squash, melons, and sweet potatoes. Spanish settlers came to Argentina in 1536. Between 1853 and 1955, 6.6 million immigrants came to live in Argentina from diverse sources such as Europe, the Near and Middle East, Russia and Japan, contributing to the development of Argentine cuisine and making Argentina the second country with most immigrants only second to the United States."ref1""ref2"Most of the immigrants were from Italy and Spain. The Italians introduced pizza, as well as a variety of pasta dishes, including spaghetti and lasagna. British, German, Jewish, and other immigrants also settled in Argentina, all bringing their styles of cooking and favorite foods with them. The British brought tea, starting the tradition of teatime. All of these cultures influenced the dishes of Argentina. - [Food in Every Country] JuliaTypical foodsFile:Dulce de leche 2007.jpg|thumb|left|text-top|Dulce de leche, a popular national spread used to fill cakes and pancakes, eaten over toast, and as an ice cream flavor.File:Empanadas salteñas 1.jpg|thumb|left|Boxed Empanadas.Most regions of Argentina are known for their beef-oriented diet. In Argentina the Spanish term,"''Carne''", which means meat, is assumed to be beef in Argentina. In other Spanish-speaking countries—such as Spain—the term is usually qualified  with the type of animal, such as "''carne de vaca''" (beef), "''carne de cordero''" (lamb), etc.Grilled meat from the ''asado'' (barbecue) is a staple, with steak and beef ribs especially common. The term asado itself refers to long strips of flank-cut beef ribs. Popular items such as ''Chorizo'' (pork sausage), ''morcilla'' (blood sausage), ''chinchulines'' (chitterlings), ''mollejas'' (sweetbread), and other parts of the animal are also enjoyed. In Patagonia, however, lamb and chivito (goat) are eaten more frequently than beef. Whole lambs and goats are traditionally cooked over an open fire in a technique known as asado a la estaca.The most common condiment for asado is ''Chimichurri'', a sauce of herbs, garlic and vinegar. Unlike other preparations, Argentines do not include chili in their version of chimichurri.Breaded and fried meats — ''milanesas'' — are used as snacks, in sandwiches, or eaten warm with mashed potatoes — ''purée''. ''Empanadas'' — small pastries of meat, cheese, sweet corn, and a hundred other fillings — are a common sight at parties and picnics, or as Entrée|starters to a meal. A variation, the "empanada gallega" (Galician empanada), is a big, round meat pie made most commonly with tuna and mackerel ("''caballa''" in Spanish). Vegetables and salads are also eaten by Argentines; tomatoes, onions, lettuce, eggplants, squashes, and zucchini are common side dishes.Italian staples, such as pizza and pasta, are eaten as commonly as beef. ''Fideos'' (noodles), ''tallarines'' (''fettucine'' and ''tagliatelle''), ''ñoquis'' (gnocchi), ''ravioles'', and ''canelones'' (cannelloni) can be bought freshly made in many establishments in the larger cities. Italian-style ice cream is served in large parlours and even drive-through businesses.In Chubut, the Welsh community is known for its teahouses, offering scones and ''torta galesa'', which is rather like ''torta negra''.''Sandwiches de miga'' are delicate sandwiches made with crustless buttered white bread, very thinly sliced cured meat, cheese, and lettuce. They are often purchased from entrepreneurial home cooks and may be eaten for a light evening meal.A sweet paste, ''dulce de leche'' is another treasured national food, used to fill cakes and pancakes, spread over toasted bread for breakfast, or served with ice cream. ''Alfajores'' are shortbread cookies sandwiched together with chocolate and ''dulce de leche'' or a fruit paste. The "policeman's" or "truck driver's" sweet is cheese with quince paste or ''dulce de membrillo''. ''Dulce de batata'' is made of sweet potato/yam: this with cheese is the ''Martín Fierro'''s sweet. Apples, pears, peaches, kiwifruits, avocados, and plums are major exports.A traditional drink of Argentina is an infusion called mate (in Spanish, ''mate'', with the accent on the first syllable [MAH-teh]). The name comes from the hollow gourd from which it is traditionally drunk. The mate (gourd) or other small cup is filled about three-quarters full with ''yerba mate'', the dried leaves and twigs of the ''Ilex paraguariensis''. The drink, which is rather bitter, is sipped through a metal or cane straw called a ''bombilla''. Mate can be sweetened with sugar, or flavored with aromatic herbs or dried orange peel. Hot but not boiling water is poured into the gourd, drunk, then the mate is refilled. The mate is nearly full of leaves, so each refill only makes a small drink, but many refills are possible before the yerba is spent. In small gatherings it is traditional for one ''mate'' to be passed from person to person, filled by whoever has the kettle. It is customary not to thank the refiller routinely; a final ''gracias'' (thank you) implies that the drinker has had enough. Source for everything about mate, including terminal "gracias".  Drinking mate together is an important social ritual. ''Mate cocido'' is the same leaf, which rather than brewed is boiled and served, like tea, with milk and sugar to taste.Other typical drinks include wine (sometimes with soda water added); tea and coffee are equally important. Quilmes is the national brand of pale lager, named after the town of Quilmes, Buenos Aires, where it was first produced.Regional differencesArgentine cuisine is heavily influenced by its European roots and has regional variations. ''Asado'', ''dulce de leche'', ''empanadas'', and ''yerba mate'' are found throughout Argentina. In many parts of the country, food is prepared differently and different kinds of foods are made; this includes to a smaller degree food from pre-Columbian times, as in the Northwest.Central region and las PampasFile:Pizza over Fainá.jpg|thumb|left|210px|Sliced pizza served over ''fainá'', a common combination.File:Puchero argentino servido.JPG|thumb|Argentine PucheroFor long periods, urban areas such as Buenos Aires, Rosario, and Córdoba, Argentina|Córdoba welcomed European immigrants, including, above all, those of Italian and Spanish descent. Nevertheless, there was also a migratory flow of German, Swiss, and Middle-Eastern immigrants arriving in Argentina. Among the countless changes this melting pot brought was the enrichment of the culinary art. Dishes such as pasta, pizza, pucheros (stews), croquetas (fritter)s, sauces, embutidos (sausages), and chicken and meat courses brought a wider scope of options to daily menus. Furthermore, the bread-making, dessert, pastry, and dairy industries have achieved considerable development in this region.The above-mentioned dishes have developed a distinctively Argentine nuance. That is why, for example, Argentine pasta includes a wide variety of dishes ranging from spaghetti, fusiles (fusilli), ñoquis (gnocchi), ravioli, cintas (pasta ribbons), and lasagne to the Argentine-made sorrentinos, agnolottis (agnolotti), canelones (cannelloni), and fetuchines (fetuchini).Pizza—made with very thin, and sometimes thick, high-rising doughs, with or without cheese, cooked in the oven or ''a la piedra'' (on a stone oven), and stuffed with numerous ingredients -— is a dish which can be found in nearly every corner of the  country. Buenos Aires, Rosario, and Córdoba, Argentina|Córdoba also serve it with fainá, which is a chick pea-flour dough placed over the piece of pizza. People say that what makes the Argentine pizza unique is the blending of Italian and Spanish cultures. At the turn of the 19th century, immigrants from Naples and Genoa opened the first pizza bars, though Spanish residents subsequently owned most of the pizza businesses.File:Alfajores de Argentina.jpg|thumb|235px|Argentine pastry, including ''Rogel'' (a cake of layers of hojaldre covered with meringue), dulce de leche, and regional variants of Alfajores (from Mar del Plata, Córdoba Province, Argentina|Córdoba, Tucumán Province|Tucumán, among others).Bread products are consumed all around the country. The deeply rooted bread, pastry, and dessert-making tradition derives from blending the above nationalities' products. Bakeries sell not only a wide scope of breads, cookies, and cakes, but also pastries. The latter resembles a sort of roll pastry whose main dough ingredient is either butter or fat and which may be simple or stuffed with dulce de leche, milk, jam, crema pastelera, or quince or apple jelly, among other fillings. The most popular type of pastry is said to be that of ''medialunas'', based upon French croissants. Furthermore, sandwiches de miga are another type of bread products; they are made only with thin layers of white bread (generally referred to as crustless bread) and stuffed with food items ranging from ham and cheese to other more sophisticated combinations such as raw ham, tomatoes, olives, hard boiled eggs, tuna, lettuce, red pepper, and the like.Desserts and sweets are usually stuffed or covered with dulce de leche. The latter can be eaten alone or on top of cakes, alfajores, panqueques (Crêpe|creppes), and pastries, or as a topping spread over flan. Chantilly cream is widely consumed and used in preparing sweets and desserts. Additionally, cakes, sponge cakes, and puddings are very popular dishes. Italian ice-creams in this region also achieved a significant degree of development by adding local flavors that somehow preserved the local spirit involved in their preparation.Although asado is eaten all over the country, its origin may be traced back to the Pampas. It entails manifold types of meat, which are generally eaten as follows: achuras (offal, or the cow's inner parts), morcilla (blood sausage), and sometimes also a provoleta (a piece of provolone cheese cooked on the grill with oregano) are eaten first. Then comes the choripán (a kind of spiced sausage made with pork or lamb and placed between two slices of bread), and lastly meat such as asado de tira, vacío (hindquarter), lomo (tenderloin), colita de cuadril (rump), matambre (rolled stuffed steak cut into slices and served cold), entraña (innards); the list is never-ending. It is quite common to eat and enjoy a dish known as ''cabrito al asador'' (roast kid or goat) in the Córdoba Province, Argentina|province of Córdoba.Northwest and Cuyoleft|210px|A bowl of ''Locro'' stew, a traditional standby in northwestern Argentina.This region is regarded as perhaps the one most influenced by native Indians, and its foods are closely linked to the Andean-Incan tradition. When preparing regional dishes, potatoes and corn or wheat are almost always used, including quinoa (a cereal typically used in Incan cuisine), peppers, squashes and tomatoes. The most celebrated dishes are humita and tamal, in which the corn husk is stuffed with the corn filling itself, seasonings or meat.This region is the most suitable to taste empanadas, particularly those stuffed with meat and offering different types of tempting varieties such as the ''meat empanada'', salteña also filled with potatoes, or the ''empanada tucumana'', which is stuffed with matambre and cut with a knife, or empanadas made with cheese. Empanadas are indibn sized and closed savoury pastries which may be fried or baked in the oven and are generally eaten with the hands.Stews such as locro, carbonada and cazuelas (casseroles) are also typical dishes characterizing this region, which also include pumpkin or potato pudding stuffed with meat.MesopotamiaMate, the northeastern region's best-known contribution to Argentine cuisine.The humid and verdant area of north-east Argentina known as Mesopotamia, comprising the provinces of Misiones, Entre Ríos and Corrientes. is another area influenced by native Indians, particularly by the Guaraní tribe. Abounding in rivers and shores, it offers a wide diversity of fish species, such as dorado, Piaractus mesopotamicus|pacú, surubi, boga and silverside.Widely grown in this area, cassava is typically included in the region's dishes, as are other components of meals, such as the chipá (a cassava and cheese bread), which originally came from Paraguay. However, in this area Cassava is cooked alone too, boiled or fried, often as a side dish for asado and empanadas. Sopa Paraguaya and Chipá Guazu (also called Tarta de Choclo) are also commonly eaten and are made with corn. Chipá from Cassava is often eaten during breakfast with yerba mate, prepared with hot water, or with café con leche. Sopa Paraguaya and Tarta de Choclo are eaten for lunch or dinner. As regards to products made with sugar, Papaya (mamón in Argentine Spanish) jam is typical of the province of Corrientes.The principal product of this region is certainly yerba mate. Consumed countrywide, this product features a peculiarity of its own in this area: it is not only prepared with hot water, but, driven by the region's high temperatures, it is common to see it prepared with cold water as well, in which case the beverage is known as tereré.PatagoniaFoods produced in the large southern region of Patagonia include fish and seafood from the sea and rivers, and the products of the sheep widely farmed there.Marine species such as salmon, spider crabs, squid and other shellfish and molluscs may be caught in the Atlantic Ocean. There are trout in the rivers.File:Tortas en San Martín de los Andes.JPG|thumb|210px|''Chocolate y dulce de leche'' cakes and other regional favorites in a San Martín de los Andes, Neuquen Province|Neuquén shop.The many berries grown in the area include cherries, bilberries, strawberries, rosa mosqueta and elders, which are made into jams.The Northern and Central European settlements in this region have built up large-scale production of chocolate and its by-products. Viennese and German cuisine and pastries are also typically associated with this region.Mutton and lamb, together with wild boar and venison tend to make up the region's meat-based dishes. Also typical of  southern region are smoked products, including salmon, stag, wild boar, and pheasant.Patagonia has been profound influenced by the tribes living there since long before Europeans arrived, in particular, the Mapuches and the Araucanos. A typical dish prepared by the latter is the curanto (a term meaning "hot stone"). Its preparation involves making a fire in a hole about 150cm deep in the ground, and heating stones in it. A bed of nalca or maqui leaves is arranged on top of the stones, and ingredients are added in turn on top. Ingredients vary, but may include beef, lamb, pork, chicken, Argentine chorizos (pork sausages), potatoes, sweet potatoes, apples and holed squashes filled with cheese, cream and peas. The food is covered with leaves and damp pieces of cloth to keep the heat in, and covered with plenty of soil.Alcoholic beveragesArgentine wineThough wine (''vino'') has traditionally been the most popular alcoholic beverage in Argentina, beer (''cerveza''; the Italian ''birra'' is frequently used) in recent decades has competed with wine in popularity. Breweries appeared in Argentina at the end of the 1860s, started by Alsatian colonists. The first were nearly all in the downtown of Buenos Aires (''el égido de la Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires''), and soon Polish brewers began industrial production of beer: San Carlos in the province of Santa Fe, Río Segundo, Córdoba|Río Segundo and Córdoba in the province of Córdoba, Quilmes and Llavallol on the outskirts of La Plata (in Buenos Aires Province), San Miguel de Tucumán in the province of Tucumán and on the outskirts of the cities of Mendoza and Salta.The local consumption of beer has risen dramatically in the last generation: Argentines consumed 233 million liters in 1980 and 1.57 billion in 2007 (40 liters per capita). Outpacing that of wine since 2001, the growing production and consumption of beer has supported the existence of related events, for example beer festivals called ''Oktoberfests'' or "''Fiestas de la Cerveza''" in locations that have a significant German population (Villa General Belgrano in Córdoba, San Carlos and Esperanza in the province of Santa Fe, etc.). Such celebrations copy, in an Argentine manner, Munich's ''Oktoberfest'', and similarly are tourist attractions. However, the presence of a vigorous population of Celtic lineage, principally of Irish origin, has supported the creation of other celebrations of beer, often for marketing purposes, such as Saint Patrick's Day (''Día de San Patricio''), patron of Ireland, which is celebrated with abundant libations.The consumption of alcoholic beverages in Argentina is similar to that of the United States and somewhat lower than the Western European average. Argentines enjoy a variety of alcoholic beverages and Argentina can boast a varied array of ''elaboraciones'', whether industrial or artisanal. Besides beer and wine, Argentines frequently drink cider (here again, the heritage comes from Spain and Italy, more precisely from Asturias and Campania). Cider is the most popular beverage of the middle and lower economic classes at Christmas and New Year (the upper classes proverbially preferring to celebrate with locally produced champagne, although real old-line "creole" aristocrats will still drink cider, which is much more traditional).Other widely consumed spirits are ''aguardiente'' (firewater) made from sugar cane, known as ''caña quemada'' ("burnt cane") or, simply, ''''caña'''' ("cane").Although "caña" in this sense is really derived from "cognac" and the term was traditionally used in old Argentina for any brandy, but especially for peach brandy, ''caña de durazno''. A folkloric note about ''caña quemada'': until June 21 it is traditional to drink ''caña quemada'' with ''ruda macho'' (a variant of common rue), it is supposed that this mixture prevents the flu and other illnesses. ''Caña'' competes, mainly in rural areas, with gin ("ginebra"—as in the Dutch kind of gin.)There are many artisanally produced liqueurs (distilled, flavored alcoholic beverages) in Argentina, for example those flavored with orange, egg, anise, coffee, cherry and, inevitably, ''dulce de leche''. The ''Hesperidina'' is a type of liqueur made from orange peels, invented in Argentina around 1890. One may also encounter ''chitronchelo'' or (in Italian) ''citroncello'', based on lemon. This beverage arrived with immigrants from the Mezzogiorno, and is produced both artisanally and industrially (for example, at Mar del Plata).Non-alcoholic specialtiesFile:Tortoni 3 008.jpg|thumb|210px|Café Tortoni, one of the many coffehouses in Buenos Aires. The consumption of coffee is very common (141 cups per capita, annually).File:Mediaslunas, café en jarrito y agua mineral en Café El Gato Negro.JPG|thumbnail|right|Traditional serving of merienda in Café El Gato Negro, Buenos Aires. ''Medialunas'' (croissants), ''café en jarrito'' (a double espresso coffee) and a little glass of mineral water.Argentines enjoy a wide variety of non-alcoholic infusions (although now and then both "families" are mixed; the ''yerbiao'' for example, is mate mixed with ''caña'' or gin). Among these, ''mate'' has long been the most widely enjoyed; in 2006, over 700,000 metric tons were harvested in Argentina, mostly for domestic consumption.The fact that mate is so prevalent in the ''Southern Cone'', however, should not necessarily make visitors think that other infusions are rare in the region; in Argentina especially, given the strong European cultural imprint, the consumption of coffee is very common (141 cups per capita, annually).autogenerated1Chocolate infusions are also popular (the eating of chocolate is a Spanish influence, although the plant originated in Mesoamerica). This consumption grows during autumn and winter, or in the cold regions of the country; there are two dates where consumption of chocolate infusions is traditional in the primary educational centres: 25 May and 9 July, that is, the two national dates of Argentina.English cultural influence (reinforced at the end of the 19th century and beginnings of the 20th by British contacts with the Far East) has also made the consumption of tea very common.Medicinal herbs are common in the whole country; among the most popular are: chamomile, lanceleaf, ''boldo'', ''poleo'', ''peperina'', ''carqueja'', thyme, ''canchalagua'', rue (''macho'' and ''hembra'', that is, "male" and "female"), mallow, rosemary, passion flower, ''bira bira'', ''palán palán'', ''Minthostachys mollis|muña muña'', to mention only the main ones. Many of these herbs are also used in apéritifs and bitters, whether alcoholic or not.Popular short-order dishes210px|''Bar Británico'', Buenos Aires. These "bars" are typically more akin to British "pubs" and are popular at lunchtime.Common ''restoranes'' or ''restaurantes'' and ''rotiserias'' (grill restaurants) nearly anywhere in Argentina today serve (into the small hours) quickly prepared meals that in the course of the 20th century came to be known as ''minutas'', "short-order dishes." Some of the dishes included in the category of ''minutas'' are ''milanesas'', ''churrascos'', ''bifes'' (beefsteaks), ''escalopes'', ''tallarines'', ''ravioles'' (ravioli), ''ñoquis'' (gnocchi), although some are very typical of locations that sell food: "''bifes''" and "''milanesas''" are served "''a caballo''" ("on horseback", with fried egg on top), "''milanesa completa''" (a ''milanesa'' with two fried eggs and French fries), "''revuelto Gramajo''", "''[colchón] de arvejas''" (an omelette made with peas), "''suprema de pollo''" (chicken supreme, usually breaded as a ''milanesa''), ''matambres'', "''lengua a la vinagreta''" (pickled tongue), and "sandwiches" (sandwiches de miga) are made with sliced white bread, rather than, say, rolls).The most common sandwiches are those made of ''milanesa'', baked ham and cheese, 'pan de miga'', toast, ''pebetes'', ''panchos'' (hot dogs), ''choripanes'', ''morcipanes'', etc.; from Montevideo comes a different species of sandwich called the ''chivito'', even though it contains no goat meat.''Picadas'', which are consumed at home or in bars, cafés, "''cafetines''" and "''bodegones''" are also popular; they consist of an ensemble of plates containing cubes of cheese (typically from Mar del Plata or Chubut), pieces of salame, olives in brine, french fries, ''maníes'' (peanuts), etc.; ''picada''s are eaten accompanied by an alcoholic beverage ("''fernet''", beer, wine with soda, to give some common examples).The people of Argentina greatly enjoy ''helado'' (ice cream or sorbet). In Spanish colonial times  a type of sorbet was made from hail or snow.File:Argentinan Buffet.jpg|A ''picada'', the Italian-influenced between-meals standbyEating habitsIn most parts of Argentina, lunch is the largest meal of the day. Excluding the largest cities, such as Buenos Aires, most towns close for lunch time. This is when most people return home to enjoy a large meal. Traditional lunches in Argentina are long and well developed. As such, it's common to not eat dinner until 9 at night.See alsoFood* Bolivian cuisine* Chilean cuisine* Peruvian cuisine* Paraguayan cuisine* Uruguayan cuisineReferences30emExternal linksCuisine of ArgentinaWines of Argentinacuisine