Ruins atop Tel Megiddo.'''Armageddon''' (, from  ''Harmagedōn'',[Bibletranslation.ws] Late Latin: ) will be, according to the Book of Revelation, the site of a gathering of armies for a battle during the end times, variously interpreted as either a literal or a symbolic location. The term is also used in a generic sense to refer to any end of the world scenario.The word "Armageddon" appears only once in the Greek New Testament, in 16:16. The word is translated to Greek from Hebrew ''har məgiddô'' (), ''har'' - Strong H2022 - meaning "a mountain or range of hills (sometimes used figuratively): - hill (country), mount (-ain), X promotion." This is a shortened form of ''Harar'' - Strong H2042 - "to loom up; a mountain; -hill, mount".  ''Megiddo'' - Strong מְגִדּוֹן H4023 /meg-id-do'/ "Megiddon or Megiddo, a place of crowds.") "Mount" Tel Megiddo is not actually a mountain, but a tell (a hill created by many generations of people living and rebuilding on the same spot)["Amateur Archaeologists Get the Dirt on the Past"], ''New York Times'' on which ancient forts were built to guard the Via Maris, an ancient trade route linking Egypt with the northern empires of Syria, Anatolia and Mesopotamia. Megiddo was the location of various ancient battles, including one in the 15th century BC and one in 609 BC. Modern Megiddo is a town approximately mi west-southwest of the southern tip of the Sea of Galilee in the Kishon River area in Israel.According to one premillennial Christian interpretation, Jesus will return to earth and defeat the Antichrist (the "beast"), the False Prophet and Satan the Devil in the Battle of Armageddon. Then Satan will be put into the "bottomless pit" or abyss for 1,000 years, known as the Millennium. After being released from the abyss, Satan will gather Gog and Magog from the four corners of the earth. They will encamp surrounding the "holy ones" and the "beloved city" (this refers to Jerusalem). Fire will come down from God, out of heaven and devour Gog and Magog. The Devil, death, hell, and those not found written in the Book of Life are then thrown into Gehenna (the lake of fire burning with brimstone).Book of Revelation in the New Testament, Rev. 19: 11-20, Rev. 20: 1-3, 7-15.ChristianityFile:Hieronymus Bosch 089.jpg|thumb|Evangelist John of Patmos writes the Book of Revelation. Painting by Hieronymus Bosch (1505).Christian eschatologyMegiddo is mentioned twelve times in the Old Testament, ten times in reference to the ancient city of Megiddo, and twice with reference to "the plain of Megiddo", most probably simply meaning "the plain next to the city". Listing of the 12 Biblical Old Testament passages containing the word "Megiddo".None of these Old Testament passages describes the city of Megiddo as being associated with any particular prophetic beliefs. The one New Testament reference to the city of Armageddon found in Revelation 16:16 in fact also makes no specific mention of any armies being predicted to one day gather in this city, but instead seems to predict only that "they (will gather) the kings together to .... Armageddon". New Testament excerpt describing various apparent calamities of nature with respect to Armageddon.The text does however seem to imply, based on the text from the earlier passage of Revelation 16:14, that the purpose of this gathering of kings in the "place called Armageddon" is "for the war of the great day of God, the Almighty".Because of the seemingly highly symbolic and even cryptic language of this one New Testament passage, some Christian scholars conclude that Mount Armageddon must be an idealized location.James B. Jordan,  Rushdoony says, "There are no mountains of Megiddo, only the Plains of Megiddo. This is a deliberate destruction of the vision of any literal reference to the place."Rousas John Rushdoony, ''Thy Kingdom Come: Studies in Daniel and Revelation'', 190.Other scholars, including C. C. Torrey, Kline and Jordan argue that the word is derived from the Hebrew ''moed'' (), meaning "assembly".Thus, "Armageddon" would mean "Mountain of Assembly," which Jordan says is "a reference to the assembly at Mount Sinai, and to its replacement, Mount Zion.""Biblical Horizons, No. 85"OrthodoxyThe traditional viewpoint interprets this bible prophecy to be symbolic of the progression of the world toward the "great day of God, the Almighty" in which the great looming mountain of God's just and holy wrath is poured out against unrepentant sinners, led by Satan, in a literal end-of-the-world final confrontation.  Armageddon is the symbolic name given to this event based on scripture references regarding divine obliteration of God's enemies.  The hermeneutical method supports this position by referencing Judges 4 and 5 where God miraculously destroys the enemy of His elect, Israel, at Megiddo.Christian scholar William Hendriksen says:This theme in the Bible begins in Genesis 3 with the prediction that the "offspring of the woman" will "crush the head" of the serpentNIV and is further depicted in the flood NKJV and drowning of Pharaoh's army in the red sea.NKJV  In these events, and others, God miraculously destroys the enemy of His elect.  This culminates with Revelation 19 where Christ appears on a white horse: "And out of his mouth goeth [comes] a sharp sword, that with it he should smite [strike down] the nations...and he treadeth [treads] the winepress of the fierceness [fury] and wrath of Almighty God.  And he hath on his vesture [robe] and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS."KJV;/blockquote;DispensationalismThe Dispensational viewpoint interprets biblical prophecy literally and expects that the fulfillment of prophecy will also be literal, depending upon the context of scripture.In his discussion of Armageddon, J. Dwight Pentecost has devoted an entire chapter to the subject, titled "The Campaign of Armageddon", in which he discusses Armageddon as a campaign and not a specific battle, which will be fought in the Middle East. Pentecost writes:Pentecost then discusses the location of this campaign, and mentions the "hill of Megiddo" and other geographic locations such as "the valley of Jehoshaphat"NKJV and "the valley of the passengers",NKJV "Lord coming from Edom or Idumea, south of Jerusalem, when He returns from the judgment"; and Jerusalem itself.Zech. 12:2-11; 14:2Pentecost further describes the area involved:Pentecost then outlines the biblical time period for this campaign to occur and with further arguments concludes that it must take place with the 70th week of Daniel. The invasion of Israel by the Northern Confederacy "will bring the Beast and his armies to the defense of Israel as her protector". He then uses Daniel to further clarify his thinking: (Dan. 11:40b-45).Again, events are listed by Pentecost in his book:# "The movement of the campaign begins when the King of the South moves against the Beast-False Prophet coalition, which takes place 'at the time of the end.'"# The King of the South gets in battle with the North King and the Northern Confederacy (NKJV). Jerusalem is destroyed as a result of this attack,NKJV and, in turn, the armies of the Northern Confederacy are destroyed.NKJV, NKJV# "The full armies of the Beast move into Israel (11:41) and shall conquer all that territory (11:41-42). Edom, Moab, and Ammon alone escape. . . ."# ". . . a report that causes alarm is brought to the Beast"NKJV, NKJV# "The Beast moves his headquarters into the land of Israel and assembles his armies there."NKJV# "It is there that his destruction will come. (11:45)."After the destruction of the Beast at the Second Coming of Jesus, the promised Kingdom is set up, in which Jesus and the Saints will rule for a thousand years. Satan is then loosed "for a season" and goes out to deceive the nations, specifically, Gog and Magog.NKJV The army mentioned attacks the Saints in the New Jerusalem, they are defeated by a judgment of fire coming down from Heaven, and then comes the Great White Throne judgment, which includes all of those through the agesNKJV and these are cast into the Lake of Fire, which event is also known as the "second death" and Gehenna, not to be confused with Hell, which is Satan's domain. Pentecost describes this as follows:Jehovah's WitnessesEschatology of Jehovah's WitnessesJehovah's Witnesses believe that Armageddon is the means by which God will fulfil his purpose for the Earth to be populated with happy healthy humans free of sin and death. They teach that the armies of heaven will eradicate all who oppose the kingdom of God, wiping out all wicked humans on Earth, leaving only righteous mankind.They believe that the gathering of all the nations of the earth refers to the uniting of the world's political powers, as a gradual process beginning in 1914 and seen later in manifestations such as the League of Nations and the United Nations following the First and Second World Wars."What Does the Bible ''Really '' Teach" pp. 215-218 '1914—A Significant Year in Bible Prophecy' These political powers are said to be influenced by Satan and his demons in opposition to God's kingdom."w2005881"Babylon the Great is interpreted as the world empire of false religion, and that it will be destroyed by the beast just prior to Armageddon.Mankind’s Search for God chap. 16 p. 371 par. 13 "the destruction of Babylon the Great will usher in a period of “great tribulation” that culminates in “the war of the great day of God the Almighty . . . Har–Magedon.” " Witnesses believe that after all other religions have been destroyed, the governments will turn to destroy them, and that God will then intervene, precipitating Armageddon.Jehovah's Witnesses teach that the armies of heaven, led by Jesus, will then destroy all forms of human government and then Jesus, along with a selected 144,000 humans, will rule Earth for 1,000 years. They believe that Satan and his demons will be bound for that period, unable to influence mankind. After the 1,000 years are ended, and the second resurrection has taken place, Satan is released and allowed to tempt the perfect human race one last time. Those who follow Satan are destroyed, along with him, leaving the earth, and humankind at peace with God forever, free of sin and death.The religion's current teaching on Armageddon originated in 1925 with former Watch Tower Society president J. F. Rutherford, who based his interpretations on the books of Exodus, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Psalms as well as additional material from the books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles. The doctrine marked a further break from the teachings of Watch Tower Society founder Charles Taze Russell, who for decades had taught that the final war would be an anarchistic struggle for domination on earth. Tony Wills, author of a historical study of Jehovah's Witnesses, claimed that Rutherford seemed to relish his descriptions of how completely the wicked would be destroyed at Armageddon, dwelling at great length on prophecies of destruction. He stated that towards the close of his ministry Rutherford allocated about half the space available in ''The Watchtower'' magazines to discussion of Armageddon.Seventh-day AdventistSeventh-day Adventist eschatology#ArmageddonSeventh-day Adventist understanding of Revelation 13-22The teachings of the Seventh-day Adventist Church state that the terms "Armageddon", "Day of the Lord" and "The Second Coming of Christ" all describe the same event."Seventh-day Adventists believe" 1988 by the Ministerial Association General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists Seventh-day Adventists further teach that the current religious movements taking place in the world are setting the stage for Armageddon, and they are concerned by an anticipated unity between spiritualism, American Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. A further significant difference in Seventh-day Adventist theology is the teaching that the events of Armageddon will leave the earth desolate for the duration of the millennium."Handbook of Seventh-day Adventist Theology" 2000 Review and Herald Publishing Association and the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists They teach that the righteous will be taken to heaven while the rest of humanity will be destroyed, leaving Satan with no one to tempt and effectively "bound."NKJV The final re-creation of a "new heaven and a new earth."NKJV then follows the millennium.ChristadelphiansFor Christadelphians, Armageddon marks the "great climax of history when the nations would be gathered together 'into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon', and the judgment on them would herald the setting up of the Kingdom of God."AhmadiyyaIn Ahmadiyya, Armageddon is viewed as a spiritual battle or struggle in the present age between the forces of good, i.e. righteousness, purity and virtue, and the forces of evil. The final struggle between the two comes as satanic influence is let loose with the emergence of Gog and Magog. Satan gathers all his powers, and uses all his methods to mislead people, introducing an age where iniquity, promiscuity, atheism, and materialism abound.Ahmadiyya believe that God appointed Promised Messiah and Mahdi for the spiritual reformation and moral direction of mankind. This age continues for approximately one thousand years as per Judeo-Christian and Islamic prophecies of the Apocalypse; it is characterised by the assembling of mankind under one faith, Islam in Ahmadiyya belief.Bahá'í FaithBattle of Megiddo (1918)From Bahá'í Faith|Bahá'í literature a number of interpretations of the expectations surrounding the Battle of Armageddon may be inferred, three of them being associated with events surrounding the World Wars.The first interpretation deals with a series of tablets written by Bahá'u'lláh, founder of the Bahá'í Faith, to be sent to various kings and rulers."Lambden"The second, and best-known one, relates to events near the end of World War I involving General Allenby and the Battle of Megiddo (1918) wherein World Powers are said to have drawn soldiers from many parts of the world to engage in battle at Megiddo. In winning this battle Allenby also prevented the Turks from killing 'Abdu'l-Baha, then head of the Baha'i Faith, whom they had intended to crucify. A third interpretation reviews the overall progress of the World Wars, and the situation in the world before and after."Lambden"InfluenceThe idea that a final Battle of Armageddon will be fought at Tel Megiddo has had a wide influence, especially in the US. According to Donald E. Wagner, Professor of Religion and Director of the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at North Park University, Ronald Reagan was an adherent of "Armageddon theology," and "seemed to blend his political analysis with his Armageddon theology quite naturally."Donald E. Wagner,Some militia groups in the US, such as the Hutaree,"[US 'Christian militants' charged after FBI raids]" ''BBC'', 30 March 2010. Retrieved 30 March 2010. are reported to have prepared for violent action associated with related apocalyptic beliefs.See alsoArmageddonArmageddon* 1 Maccabees* Antiochus Epiphanes* Apocalyptic literature* ''Armageddon'' (novel)* Dagor Dagorath* Futurist view of the Book of Revelation* Historicist views of Revelation* ''Megiddo: The Omega Code 2''* Millenarianism* Millennialism* Preterist interpretation of the Book of Revelation* Ragnarök* Siege of Jerusalem (70)* ''Waiting for Armageddon''References2