The '''Arno''' is a river in the Tuscany region of Italy. It is the most important river of central Italy after the Tiber.Source and route"Ponte vecchio" (The old bridge)The river originates on Mount Falterona in the Casentino area of the Apennines, and initially takes a southward curve. The river turns to the west near Arezzo passing through Florence, Empoli and Pisa, flowing into the Tyrrhenian Sea at Marina di Pisa.With a length of km, it is the largest river in the region. It has many tributaries: Sieve at mi long, Bisenzio at km, and the Era, Elsa, Pesa, and Pescia. The drainage basin amounts to more than sqkm and drains the waters of the following subbasins:*The Casentino, in the province of Arezzo, formed by the upper course of the river until its confluence with the Maestro della Chiana channel.*The Val di Chiana, a plain drained in the 18th century, which until then had been a marshy area tributary of the Tiber.*The upper Valdarno, a long valley bordered on the east by the Pratomagno massif and on the west by the hills around Siena.*The Sieve's basin, which flows into the Arno immediately before Florence.*The middle Valdarno, with the plain including Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Prato, and Pistoia.*The lower Valdarno, with the valley of important tributaries such as the Pesa, Elsa, and Era and in which, after Pontedera, the Arno flows into the Ligurian Sea. The river has a very variable discharge, ranging from about  to more than . The mouth of the river was once near Pisa but is now several kilometres westwards.It crosses Florence, where it passes below the Ponte Vecchio and the Ponte Santa Trinita|Santa Trìnita bridge (built by Bartolomeo Ammanati but inspired by Michelangelo). The river flooded this city regularly in historical times, most recently in 1966, with  after rainfall of mm in Badia Agnano and mm in Florence, in only 24 hours.The flow rate of the Arno is irregular. It is sometimes described as having a torrentlike behaviour, because it can easily go from almost dry to near flood in a few days. At the point where the Arno leaves the Apennines, flow measurements can vary between . New dams built upstream of Florence have greatly alleviated the problem in recent years.The flood on November 4, 1966 collapsed the embankment in Florence, killing at least 40 people and damaging or destroying millions of works of art and rare books.  New conservation techniques were inspired by the disaster, but even 40 years later hundreds of works still await restoration.EtymologyFrom Latin ''Arnus'' (Pliny, ''Natural History'' 3.50). The philologist Hans Krahe related this toponym on a paleo-European basis  ''*Ar-n-'', derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *''er-'', "flow, move".Edelmiro Bascuas, '' Hidronimia y léxico de origen paleoeuropeo en Galicia'' (page 41)GalleryFile:Arno_river.jpg|The Arno in FlorenceFile:Arno River in Pisa.honeydew.jpg|The Arno in Pisa, near the Ponte della Fortezza (Fortress Bridge)File:Firenze.Arno.jpg|Banks of the Arno, seen from the Ponte Vecchio (Old Bridge), FlorenceFile:Arno_Mouth_Italy_aerial_view.jpg|Mouth of the Arno in Marina di PisaFile:Florence Arno 180.jpg|The Arno in Florence, 180 degree view: the Uffizi Gallery is straight across and the Ponte Vecchio is to the leftFile:Florence at night.jpg|The Arno in Florence at nightFile:Ponte amerigo vespucci.JPG|The Ponte Amerigo Vespucci (Amerigo Vespucci Bridge)ReferencesExternal linksArno River*[Basin Authority of the Arno]