In phonetics, '''aspiration''' is the strong burst of breath that accompanies either the release or, in the case of preaspiration, the closure of some obstruents. In English, aspirated consonants are allophones in complementary distribution with their unaspirated counterparts, but in some other languages, notably most Indian and East Asian languages, the difference is contrastive.To feel or see the difference between aspirated and unaspirated sounds, one can put a hand or a lit candle in front of one's mouth, and say ''pin''  and then ''spin'' . One should either feel a puff of air or see a flicker of the candle flame with ''pin'' that one does not get with ''spin''. In most dialects of English, the  initial consonant is aspirated in ''pin'' and unaspirated in ''spin''.TranscriptionIn the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), aspirated consonants are written using the symbols for voiceless consonants followed by the Phonetic symbols in Unicode#Spacing Modifier Letters (U+02B0–02FF)|aspiration modifier letter }}, a superscript form of the symbol for the voiceless glottal fricative . For instance,  represents the voiceless bilabial stop, and }} represents the aspirated bilabial stop.Voiced consonants are seldom actually aspirated. Symbols for voiced consonants followed by }}, such as }}, typically represent consonants with breathy voiced release (see below). In the grammatical tradition of Sanskrit, aspirated consonants are called '''voiceless aspirated''', and breathy-voiced consonants are called '''voiced aspirated'''.There are no dedicated IPA symbols for degrees of aspiration and typically only two degrees are marked: unaspirated  and aspirated }}. An old symbol for light aspiration was }}, but this is now obsolete. The aspiration modifier letter may be doubled to indicate especially strong or long aspiration. Hence, the two degrees of aspiration in Korean stops are sometimes transcribed }} or }} and }}, but they are usually transcribed  and , word lists from , , . with the details of voice-onset time given numerically.Preaspirated consonants are marked by placing the aspiration modifier letter before the consonant symbol: }} represents the preaspirated bilabial stop.'''Unaspirated''' or tenuis consonants are occasionally marked with the modifier letter for unaspiration }}, a superscript equal sign: }}. Usually, however, unaspirated consonants are left unmarked: .Phonetics"hot, under"''''| filename2    = Hy-ea-այծ-այց.ogg| title2       = Final voiceless and aspirated alveolar affricates| description2 =   "goat, visit"''''| filename3    = Hy-EA-գնացք.ogg| title3       = Final aspirated affricate–stop cluster| description3 =  "train"''''| filename4    = Hy-EA-աղոթք.ogg| title4       = Final aspirated stop–stop cluster| description4 =  "prayer"''''}}Voiceless consonants are produced with the vocal folds open (spread) and not vibrating, and voiced consonants are produced when the vocal folds are fractionally closed and vibrating (modal voice). Voiceless aspiration occurs when the vocal cords remain open after a consonant is released. An easy way to measure this is by noting the consonant's voice-onset time, as the voicing of a following vowel cannot begin until the vocal cords close.Phonetically in some languages, such as Navajo, aspiration of stops tends to be realised as voiceless velar airflow; aspiration of affricates is realised as an extended length of the frication.Aspirated consonants are not always followed by vowels or other voiced sounds. For example, in Eastern Armenian, aspiration is contrastive even word-finally, and aspirated consonants occur in consonant clusters. In Wahgi, consonants are aspirated only in final position.DegreeThe degree of aspiration varies: the voice-onset time of aspirated stops is longer or shorter depending on the language or the place of articulation.Armenian and Cantonese have aspiration that lasts about as long as English aspirated stops, in addition to unaspirated stops. Korean has lightly aspirated stops that fall between the Armenian and Cantonese unaspirated and aspirated stops as well as strongly aspirated stops whose aspiration lasts longer than that of Armenian or Cantonese. (See voice-onset time.)Aspiration varies with place of articulation. The Spanish voiceless stops  have voice-onset times (VOTs) of about 5, 10, and 30 milliseconds, whereas English aspirated  have VOTs of about 60, 70, and 80 ms. Voice-onset time in Korean has been measured at 20, 25, and 50 ms for  and 90, 95, and 125 for .Doubling'''' "Mecca":| filename2    = Hy-EA-կեցցե.ogg| title2       = Double aspirated ''c’c’''| description2 = '''' "long live!": }}When aspirated consonants are doubled or geminated, the stop is held longer and then has an aspirated release. An aspirated affricate consists of a stop, fricative, and aspirated release. A doubled aspirated affricate has a longer hold in the stop portion and then has a release consisting of the fricative and aspiration.PreaspirationIcelandic and Faroese have '''preaspirated''' ; some scholars interpret these as consonant clusters as well. In Icelandic, preaspirated stops Icelandic phonology#Aspiration/length contrasts (medial and final)|contrast with double stops and single stops:* ''kapp''  or  "zeal"* ''gabb''  "hoax"* ''gap''  "opening"Preaspirated stops also occur in most Sami languages; for example, in North Sami, the unvoiced stop and affricate phonemes , , , ,  are pronounced preaspirated (,  , , ) when they occur in medial or final position.FricativeAlthough most aspirated obstruents in the world's language are stops and affricates, aspirated fricatives such as ,  or  have been documented in Korean, in a few Tibeto-Burman languages, in some Oto-Manguean languages, and in the Siouan language Ofo. Some languages, such as Choni Tibetan, have up to four contrastive aspirated fricatives  ,  and .Voiced stopVoiced consonants with voiceless aspirationTrue aspirated voiced consonants, as opposed to murmured (breathy-voice) consonants such as the  that are common in the languages of India, are extremely rare. They have been documented in KelabitRobert Blust, 2006, "The Origin of the Kelabit Voiced Aspirates: A Historical Hypothesis Revisited", ''Oceanic Linguistics'' 45:311 Taa, and the Kx'a languages. Reported aspirated voiced stops, affricates and clicks are .PhonologyAspiration has varying significance in different languages. It is either allophonic or phonemic, and may be analyzed as an underlying consonant cluster.Allophonic| filename2    = En-us-distend distaste.ogg| title2       = Aspiration alternation in single-stem and compound word| description2 = ''distend'' with unaspirated ''t'',''distaste'' (''dis-taste'') with aspirated ''t'': }}In some languages, such as English, aspiration is allophonic. Stops are distinguished primarily by voicing, and voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated, while voiced stops are usually unaspirated.English voiceless stops are aspirated for most native speakers when they are word-initial or begin a stressed syllable, as in ''pill'', ''till'', ''kill''.They are unaspirated for almost all speakers when immediately following word-initial s, as in ''spill'', ''still'', ''skill''. After an ''s'' elsewhere in a word they are normally unaspirated as well, except sometimes in compound words. When the consonants in a cluster like ''st'' are analyzed as belonging to different morphemes (heteromorphemic) the stop is aspirated, but when they are analyzed as belonging to one morpheme the stop is unaspirated. For instance, ''distend'' has unaspirated  since it is not analyzed as two morphemes, but ''distaste'' has an aspirated middle  because it is analyzed as ''dis-'' + ''taste'' and the word ''taste'' has an aspirated initial ''t''.Word-final voiceless stops are sometimes aspirated.PhonemicIn many languages, such as Armenian, Korean, Thai, Indo-Aryan languages, Dravidian languages, Icelandic, Ancient Greek, and the varieties of Chinese, tenuis and aspirated consonants are phonemic. Unaspirated consonants like  and aspirated consonants like  are separate phonemes, and words are distinguished by whether they have one or the other.Consonant clusterAlemannic German dialects have unaspirated  as well as aspirated ; the latter series are usually viewed as consonant clusters.TensenessIn Danish and most southern varieties of German, the "lenis" consonants transcribed for historical reasons as }} are distinguished from their fortis counterparts , mainly in their lack of aspiration.AbsenceFrench,Standard Dutch,Frans Hinskens, Johan Taeldeman, '''', Walter de Gruyter 2014. 3110261332, 9783110261332, p.66 Tamil, Italian, Russian, Spanish, Modern Greek, and Latvian are languages that do not have aspirated consonants.ExamplesChinese| filename2    = Zh-tan4.ogg| title2       = Aspirated ''t''| description2 =| filename3    = Zh-zao3.ogg| title3       = Unaspirated ''ts''| description3 =| filename4    = Zh-cǎo.ogg| title4       = Aspirated ''ts''| description4 =}}Standard Chinese (Mandarin) has stops and affricates distinguished by aspiration: for instance, , . In pinyin, tenuis stops are written with letters that represent voiced consonants in English, and aspirated stops with letters that represent voiceless consonants. Thus ''d'' represents , and ''t'' represents .Wu Chinese has a three-way distinction in stops and affricates: . In addition to aspirated and unaspirated consonants, there is a series of ''muddy consonants'', like . These are pronounced with slack or breathy voice: that is, they are weakly voiced. Muddy consonants as initial cause a syllable to be pronounced with low pitch or four tones (Chinese)|''light'' (陽 ''yáng'') tone.Indian languages''ṭāl ṭhāl ḍāl ḍhāl'' "postpone, wood shop, branch, shield"}}Dravidian languages#PhonologyMany Indo-Aryan languages have aspirated stops. Sanskrit, Hindi, Bengali, Marathi, and Gujarati have a four-way distinction in stops: voiceless, aspirated, voiced, and breathy-voiced or voiced aspirated, such as . Punjabi has lost breathy-voiced consonants, which resulted in a tone system, and therefore has a distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced: .Some of the Dravidian languages, such as Telugu, Tamil, Malayalam, and Kannada, have a distinction between voiced and voiceless, aspirated and unaspirated only in loanwords from Indo-Aryan languages. In native Dravidian words, there is no distinction between these categories and stops are underspecified for voicing and aspiration.Armenian"chisel, give!, sword"''''| filename2    = Hy-EA-թագ-թակ-թաք.ogg| title2       = Final voiced, voiceless, and aspirated velar stops| description2 = "crown, mallet, only"'''':| filename3    = Hy-EA-ձախ-ծախ-ցախ.ogg| title3       = Dental affricates| description3 = "left-hand, sale, brushwood"'''':}}Most dialects of Armenian have aspirated stops, and some have breathy-voiced stops.Classical and Eastern Armenian have a three-way distinction between voiceless, aspirated, and voiced, such as .Western Armenian has a two-way distinction between aspirated and voiced: . Western Armenian aspirated  corresponds to Eastern Armenian aspirated  and voiced , and Western voiced  corresponds to Eastern voiceless .GreekAncient Greek phonologySome forms of Greek before the Koine Greek period are reconstructed as having aspirated stops. The Classical Attic dialect of Ancient Greek had a three-way distinction in stops like Eastern Armenian: . These stops were called  "thin, thick, middle" by Koine Greek grammarians.There were aspirated stops at three places of articulation: labial, coronal, and velar . Earlier Greek, represented by Mycenaean Greek, likely had a labialized velar aspirated stop , which later became labial, coronal, or velar depending on dialect and phonetic environment.The other Ancient Greek dialects, Ionic, Doric, Aeolic, and Arcadocypriot, likely had the same three-way distinction at one point, but Doric seems to have had a fricative in place of  in the Classical period, and the Ionic and Aeolic dialects sometimes lost aspiration (psilosis).Later, during the Koine Greek period, the aspirated and voiceless stops  of Attic Greek lenited to voiceless and voiced fricatives, yielding  in Medieval and Modern Greek.Other usesDebuccalizationThe term ''aspiration'' sometimes refers to the sound change of debuccalization, in which a consonant is lenited (weakened) to become a glottal stop or fricative .Breathy-voiced releaseBreathy voiceSo-called voiced aspirated consonants are nearly always pronounced instead with breathy voice, a type of phonation or vibration of the vocal folds. The modifier letter }} after a voiced consonant actually represents a breathy-voiced or murmured dental stop, as with the "voiced aspirated" bilabial stop }} in the Indo-Aryan languages. This consonant is therefore more accurately transcribed as }}, with the diacritic for breathy voice, or with the modifier letter }}, a superscript form of the symbol for the voiced glottal fricative }}.Some linguists restrict the double-dot subscript }} to murmured sonorants, such as vowels and nasals, which are murmured throughout their duration, and use the superscript hook-aitch }} for the breathy-voiced release of obstruents.See also*Aspirated h*Voice-onset time*List of phonetic topics*Phonation*Preaspiration*Rough breathing*Smooth breathing*Breathy voice*Tenuis consonant (Unaspirated consonant)NotesReferences*Cho, T., ; Ladefoged, P., "Variations and universals in VOT". In ''Fieldwork Studies of Targeted Languages V: UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics'' vol. 95. 1997.