File:Memoirs of Franklin.jpg|thumb|200px|right|Cover of the first English edition of Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, 1793An '''autobiography''' (from the Greek, αὐτός-''autos'' self +  βίος-''bios'' life + γράφειν-''graphein'' to write) is a written account of the life of a person written by that person. In other words, it is the story that a person wrote about themselves.Origin of the termThe word "autobiography" was first used deprecatingly by William Taylor in 1797 in the English periodical the ''Monthly Review'', when he suggested the word as a hybrid, but condemned it as "pedantic". However, its next recorded use was in its present sense, by Robert Southey in 1809.Oxford English Dictionary, ''Autobiography'' Nonetheless, autobiography as a form goes back to Antiquity. Biographers generally rely on a wide variety of documents and viewpoints, whereas autobiography may be based entirely on the writer's memory. Closely associated with autobiography (and sometimes hard to distinguish from it) is the memoir form.''See also: List of autobiographies and :Category:Autobiographies for examples.''Autobiography through the agesThe classical period: Apologia, oration, confessionIn antiquity such works were typically entitled ''apologia,'' purporting to be self-justification rather than self-documentation. John Henry Newman's autobiography (first published in 1864) is entitled ''Apologia Pro Vita Sua'' in reference to this tradition.The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus introduces his autobiography (''Josephi Vita'', c. 99) with self-praise, which is followed by a justification of his actions as a Jewish rebel commander of Galilee.The pagan rhetor Libanius (c. 314–394) framed his life memoir (''Oration I'' begun in 374) as one of his orations, not of a public kind, but of a literary kind that could not be aloud in privacy.Augustine (354–430) applied the title ''Confessions'' to his autobiographical work, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau used the same title in the 18th century,  initiating the chain of confessional and sometimes racy and highly self-critical, autobiographies of the Romantic era and beyond.In the spirit of Augustine's ''Confessions'' is the 12th-century ''Historia Calamitatum'' of Peter Abelard, outstanding as an autobiographical document of its period.Early autobiographiesright|A scene from the ''Baburnama''The first autobiographical work in Islamic society was written in the late 11th century, by Abdallah ibn Buluggin, last Zirid king of Granada.In the 15th century, Leonor López de Córdoba, a Spanish noblewoman, wrote her ''Memorias'', which may be the first autobiography in Castillian.Babur|Zāhir ud-Dīn Mohammad Bābur,who founded the Mughal dynasty of South Asia kept a journal ''Baburnama|Bāburnāma'' (Chagatailiterally: ''"Book of Babur"'' or ''"Letters of Babur"'') which was written between 1493 and 1529.One of the first great autobiographies of the Renaissance is that of the sculptor and goldsmith Benvenuto Cellini (1500–1571), written between 1556 and 1558, and entitled by him simply ''Vita'' (Italian: ''Life''). He declares at the start: "No matter what sort he is, everyone who has to his credit what are or really seem great achievements, if he cares for truth and goodness, ought to write the story of his own life in his own hand; but no one should venture on such a splendid undertaking before he is over forty."Benvenuto Cellini, tr. George Bull, ''The Autobiography'', London 1966 p.15. These criteria for autobiography generally persisted until recent times, and most serious autobiographies of the next three hundred years conformed to them.Another autobiography of the period is ''De vita propria'', by the Italian mathematician, physician and astrologer Gerolamo Cardano (1574).The earliest known autobiography in English is the early 15th-century ''Book of Margery Kempe'', describing among other things Kempe's pilgrimage to the Holy Land and visit to Rome. The book remained in manuscript and was not published until 1936.Notable English autobiographies of the 17th century include those of Lord Herbert of Cherbury (1643, published 1764) and John Bunyan (''Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners'', 1666).MemoirsMemoirA memoir is slightly different in character from an autobiography. While an autobiography typically focuses on the "life and times" of the writer, a memoir has a narrower, more intimate focus on his or her own memories, feelings and emotions. Memoirs have often been written by politicians or military leaders as a way to record and publish an account of their public exploits.One early example is that of Julius Caesar's ''Commentarii de Bello Gallico'', also known as ''Commentaries on the Gallic Wars''. In the work, Caesar describes the battles that took place during the nine years that he spent fighting local armies in the Gallic Wars. His second memoir, ''Commentarii de Bello Civili'' (or ''Commentary on the Civil War'') is an account of the events that took place between 49 and 48 BC in the civil war against Gnaeus Pompeius and the Senate.Leonor López de Córdoba (1362–1420) wrote what is supposed to be the first autobiography in Spanish. The English Civil War (1642–1651) provoked a number of examples of this genre, including works by Sir Edmund Ludlow and Sir John Reresby. French examples from the same period include the memoirs of Jean François Paul de Gondi, cardinal de Retz|Cardinal de Retz (1614–1679) and the Duc de Saint-Simon.18th and 19th centuriesNotable 18th-century autobiographies in English include those of Edward Gibbon and Benjamin Franklin. Following the trend of Romanticism, which greatly emphasised the role and the nature of the individual, and in the footsteps of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's ''Confessions'', a more intimate form of autobiography, exploring the subject's emotions, came into fashion. Stendhal's autobiographical writings of the 1830s, ''The Life of Henry Brulard'' and ''Memoirs of an Egotist'', are both avowedly influenced by Rousseau. An English example is William Hazlitt's ''Liber Amoris'' (1823), a painful examination of the writer's love-life.With the rise of education, cheap newspapers and cheap printing, modern concepts of fame and celebrity began to develop, and the beneficiaries of this were not slow to cash in on this by producing autobiographies. It became the expectation—rather than the exception—that those in the public eye should write about themselves—not only writers such as Charles Dickens (who also incorporated autobiographical elements in his novels) and Anthony Trollope, but also politicians (e.g. Henry Brooks Adams), philosophers (e.g. John Stuart Mill), churchmen such as Cardinal Newman, and entertainers such as P. T. Barnum. Increasingly, in accordance with romantic taste, these accounts also began to deal, amongst other topics, with aspects of childhood and upbringing—far removed from the principles of "Cellinian" autobiography.;;20th and 21st centuriesFrom the 17th century onwards, "scandalous memoirs" by supposed libertines, serving a public taste for titillation, have been frequently published. Typically pseudonymous, they were (and are) largely works of fiction written by ghostwriters. So-called "autobiographies" of modern professional athletes and media celebrities—and to a lesser extent about politicians, generally written by a ghostwriter, are routinely published. Some celebrities, such as Naomi Campbell, admit to not having read their "autobiographies".. Some sensationalist autobiographies such as James Frey's "A Million Little Pieces" have been publicly exposed as having embellished or fictionalized significant details of the authors' lives.Autobiography has become an increasingly popular and widely accessible form. ''A Fortunate Life'' by Albert Facey (1979) has become an Australian literary classic. With the critical and commercial success in the United States of such memoirs as ''Angela’s Ashes'' and ''The Color of Water'', more and more people have been encouraged to try their hand at this genre.Nature of autobiographyAutobiographical works are by nature subjective. The inability—or unwillingness—of the author to accurately recall memories has in certain cases resulted in misleading or incorrect information. Some sociologists and psychologists have noted that autobiography offers the author the ability to recreate history.Berghegger, Scott. (2005). "Sublime Inauthenticity: How critical is truth in autobiography?" Student PulseFictional autobiographyThe term "fictional autobiography" signifies novels about a fictional character written as though the character were writing their own autobiography, meaning that the character is the first-person narrator and that the novel addresses both internal and external experiences of the character. Daniel Defoe's ''Moll Flanders'' is an early example. Charles Dickens' ''David Copperfield'' is another such classic, and J.D. Salinger's ''The Catcher in the Rye'' is a well-known modern example of fictional autobiography. Charlotte Brontë's ''Jane Eyre'' is yet another example of fictional autobiography, as noted on the front page of the original version. The term may also apply to works of fiction purporting to be autobiographies of real characters, e.g., Robert Nye's ''Memoirs of Lord Byron''.See also* Alphabiography* Autobiogeography* Autobiographical comics* Autobiographical novel* I Novel* Autobiographical songs* Biography* List of autobiographies* Memoir* Unreliable NarratorNotes and referencesBibliography********Further reading* Padva, Gilad (2014). Reinventing Lesbian Youth in Su Friedrich's Cinematic Autoqueerography ''Hide and Seek''. In Padva, Gilad, ''Queer Nostalgia in Cinema and Pop Culture'', pp.123–138. Basingstock, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-137-26633-0.Biography