Bacillus (insect)Gram stain of a ''Bacillus'' species'''''Bacillus''''' is a genus of Gram-positive, rod-shaped (bacillus) bacteria and a member of the phylum Firmicutes. ''Bacillus'' species can be obligate aerobes (oxygen reliant), or facultative anaerobes (having the ability to be aerobic or anaerobic). They will test positive for the enzyme catalase when there has been oxygen used or present. Ubiquitous in nature, ''Bacillus'' includes both free-living (nonparasitic) and parasitic pathogenic species. Under stressful environmental conditions, the bacteria can produce oval endospores that are not true 'spores', but to which the bacteria can reduce themselves  and remain in a dormant state for very long periods. These characteristics originally defined the genus, but not all such species are closely related, and many have been moved to other genera of the Firmicutes.Many species of ''Bacillus'' can produce copious amounts of enzymes which are made use of in different industries. Some species can form intracellular inclusions of polyhydroxyalkanoates under certain adverse environmental conditions, as in a lack of elements such as phosphorus, nitrogen, or oxygen combined with an excessive supply of carbon sources.''B.subtilis''  has proved a valuable model for research. Other species of ''Bacillus'' are important pathogens, causing anthrax and food poisoning.Industrial significanceMany ''Bacillus'' species are able to secrete large quantities of enzymes. ''Bacillus amyloliquefaciens'' is the source of a natural antibiotic protein barnase (a ribonuclease), alpha amylase used in starch hydrolysis, the protease subtilisin used with detergents, and the BamH1 restriction enzyme used in DNA research.A portion of the ''Bacillus thuringiensis'' genome was incorporated into corn (and cotton) crops. The resulting GMOs are therefore resistant to some insect pests.Use as model organism''Bacillus subtilis'' is one of the best understood prokaryotes, in terms of molecular  and cellular biology. Its superb genetic amenability and relatively large size have provided the powerful tools required to investigate a bacterium from all possible aspects. Recent improvements in fluorescence microscopy techniques have provided novel and amazing insight into the dynamic structure of a single cell organism. Research on ''B. subtilis'' has been at the forefront of bacterial molecular biology and cytology, and the organism is a model for differentiation, gene/protein regulation, and cell cycle events in bacteria.Ecological signficance''Bacillus'' species are almost ubiquitous in nature, e.g. in soil, but also occur in extreme environments such as high pH (''B. alcalophilus''), high temperature (''B. thermophilus''), or high salt (''B. halodurans''). ''B. thuringiensis'' produces a toxin that can kill insects and thus has been used as insecticide.Joan L. Slonczewski ; John W. Foster (2011), ''Microbiology: An Evolving Science'' (2nd Edition), NortonClinical significanceTwo ''Bacillus'' species are considered medically significant: ''B. anthracis'', which causes anthrax, and ''B. cereus'', which causes food poisoning similar to that caused by ''Staphylococcus''. A third species, ''B. thuringiensis'', is an important insect pathogen, and is sometimes used to control insect pests. The type species is ''B. subtilis'', an important model organism. It is also a notable food spoiler, causing ropiness in bread and related food. Some environmental and commercial strains of ''B. coagulans'' may play a role in food spoilage of highly acidic, tomato-based products.An easy way to isolate ''Bacillus'' species is by placing nonsterile soil in a test tube with water, shaking, placing in melted mannitol salt agar, and incubating at room temperature for at least a day. Colonies are usually large, spreading, and irregularly shaped. Under the microscope, the ''Bacillus'' cells appear as rods, and a substantial portion of the cells usually contain oval endospores at one end, making it bulge.Cell wallThe cell wall of ''Bacillus'' is a structure on the outside of the cell that forms the second barrier between the bacterium and the environment, and at the same time maintains the rod shape and withstands the pressure generated by the cell's turgor. The cell wall is composed of teichoic and teichuronic acids. ''B. subtilis'' is the first bacterium for which the role of an actin-like cytoskeleton in cell shape determination and peptidoglycan synthesis was identified, and for which the entire set of peptidoglycan-synthesizing enzymes was localised. The role of the cytoskeleton in shape generation and maintenance is importantPhylogenyThe genus ''Bacillus'' was named in 1835 by Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg, to contain rod-shaped (bacillus) bacteria. He had seven years earlier named the genus ''Bacterium''. ''Bacillus'' was later amended by Ferdinand Cohn to further describe them as spore-forming, Gram-positive, aerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria. Cohn F.: ''Untersuchungen über Bakterien. Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen'' Heft 2, 1872, 1, 127-224. Like other genera associated with the early history of microbiology, such as ''Pseudomonas'' and ''Vibrio'', the 266 species of ''Bacillus'' are ubiquitous. The genus has a very large ribosomal 16S diversity and is environmentally diverse.Several studies have tried to reconstruct the phylogeny of the genus. The ''Bacillus''-specific study with the most diversity covered is by Xu and Cote using 16S and the ITS regions, where they divide the genus into 10 groups, which includes the nested genera ''Paenibacillus, Brevibacillus, Geobacillus, Marinibacillus'' and ''Virgibacillus''. However, the tree  constructed by the living tree project, a collaboration between ARB-Silva and LPSN where a 16S (and 23S if available) tree of all validated species was constructed, the genus ''Bacillus'' contains a very large number of nested taxa and majorly in both 16S and 23S it is paraphyletic to the Lactobacillales (''Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Listeria'', etc.), due to ''Bacillus coahuilensis'' and others. A gene concatenation study found similar results to Xu and Cote, but with a much more limited number of species in terms of groups, but used ''Listeria'' as an outgroup, so in light of the ARB tree, it may be "inside-out".One clade, formed by ''B. anthracis'', ''B. cereus'', ''B. mycoides'', ''B. pseudomycoides'', ''B. thuringiensis'', and ''B. weihenstephanensis'' under current classification standards, should be a single species (within 97% 16S identity), but due to medical reasons, they are considered separate species,Ole Andreas Økstad and Anne-Brit Kolstø  in M. Wiedmann, W. Zhang (eds.), ''Genomics of Foodborne Bacterial Pathogens'', 29 Food Microbiology and Food Safety. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011 DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7686-4_2 an issue also present for four species of ''Shigella'' and ''Escherichia coli''.Brenner (D.J.): Family I. Enterobacteriaceae Rahn 1937, Nom. fam. cons. Opin. 15, Jud. Com. 1958, 73; Ewing, Farmer, and Brenner 1980, 674; Judicial Commission 1981, 104. In: N.R. Krieg and J.G. Holt (eds), ''Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology'', first edition, vol. 1, The Williams ; Wilkins Co, Baltimore, 1984, pp. 408-420|2}}|2|2=''Bacillus'' sp. NRRLB-14911}}|2}}}}}}}}}}}}}}See also* ''Paenibacillus'' and ''Virgibacillus'' are genera of bacteria that were formerly included in ''Bacillus'';-;References;-------------------------------------------------------------See for adiscussion of different citation methods and how to generatefootnotes using the  ;  tags and the  template-------------------------------------------------------------------- --;2External linksBacillus