Baku (disambiguation)File:Baku by Katsushika Hokusai.jpg|thumb|155px|right|A ''baku'' by Katsushika Hokusai.are Japanese supernatural beings that devour dreams and nightmares. According to legend, they were created by the spare pieces that were left over when the gods finished creating all other animals. They have a long history in Japanese folklore and art, and more recently have appeared in Japanese anime and manga (see examples cited below).The Japanese term ''baku'' has two current meanings, referring to both the traditional dream-devouring creature and to the zoological tapir (e.g., the Malayan Tapir).Nakagawa Masako 1999 "Sankai ibutsu: An early seventeenth-century Japanese illustrated manuscript". ''Sino-Japanese Studies'', 11:24-38. Pages 33–34.  In recent years, there have been changes in how the baku is depicted.History and descriptionThe traditional Japanese nightmare-devouring baku originates in Chinese folklore and was familiar in Japan as early as the Muromachi period (14th-15th century).Hori Tadao 2005 "Cultural note on dreaming and dream study in the future: Release from nightmare and development of dream control technique," ''Sleep and Biological Rhythms'' 3 (2), 49–55. Hori Tadao has described the dream-eating abilities attributed to the traditional baku and relates them to other preventatives against nightmare such as amulets. Kaii-Yōkai Denshō Database, citing a 1957 paper, and Mizuki also describe the dream-devouring capacities of the traditional baku.Mizuki, Shigeru 2004 ''Mujara 5: Tōhoku, Kyūshū-hen'' (in Japanese). Japan: Soft Garage. page 137. ISBN 4-86133-027-0.An early 17th-century Japanese manuscript, the ''Sankai Ibutsu'' (), describes the baku as a shy, Chinese mythical chimera with an elephant’s trunk, rhinoceros eyes, an ox tail, and tiger paws, which protected against pestilence and evil, although eating nightmares was not included among its abilities."nakagawa"However, in a 1791 Japanese wood-block illustration, a specifically dream-destroying baku is depicted with an elephant’s head, tusks, and trunk, with horns and tiger’s claws. The elephant’s head, trunk, and tusks are characteristic of baku portrayed in classical era (pre-Meiji) Japanese wood-block prints (see illustration) and in shrine, temple, and netsuke carvings.. (Accessed September 5, 2007.)Richard Smart, "[Delivering men from evil]", ''Japan Times,'' February 16, 2007. (Accessed September 8, 2007.)(Accessed October 12, 2010.) Writing in the Meiji era, Lafcadio Hearn (1902) described a baku with very similar attributes that was also able to devour nightmares.Hearn, Lafcadio 1902 Kottō: ''Being Japanese Curios, with Sundry Cobwebs''. Macmillan. Pages 245-248. ISBN 4-86133-027-0.Legend has it, that a person who wakes up from a bad dream can call out to baku. A child having a nightmare in Japan will wake up and repeat three times “Baku-san, come eat my dream.” Legends say that the baku will come into the child’s room and devour the bad dream, allowing the child to go back to sleep peacefully. However, calling to the baku must be done sparingly, because if he remains hungry after eating one’s nightmare, he may also devour their hopes and desires as well, leaving them to live an empty life. The baku can also be summoned for protection from bad dreams prior to falling asleep at night. To this day, it remains common for Japanese children to keep a baku talisman at their bedside.M.Reese:"The Asian traditions and myths".pg.60Hadland Davis F., "Myths and Legends of Japan" (London: G. G. Harrap, 1913)GalleryKonnoHachiman-Sculpture-1.jpg|Baku at the Konnoh Hachimangu Shrine, Shibuya, Tokyo, JapanKonnoHachiman-Sculpture-3.jpg|Baku and Lion at the Konnoh Hachimangu Shrine, Shibuya, Tokyo, JapanSee also* DreamcatcherNotes;references group="n"References* Kaii-Yōkai Denshō Database. International Research Center for Japanese Studies. Retrieved on 2007-05-12. (Summary of excerpt from ''Warui Yume o Mita Toki'' (, When You've Had a Bad Dream?) by Keidō Matsushita, published in volume 5 of the journal ''Shōnai Minzoku'' (, Shōnai Folk Customs) on June 15, 1957).External links* at hyakumonogatari.com (English).*[Netsuke: masterpieces from the Metropolitan Museum of Art], an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains many representations of Baku