Balladeering (album)Illustration by Arthur Rackham of the ballad "The Twa Corbies"A '''ballad'''  is a form of verse, often a narrative set to music. Ballads derive from the medieval French ''chanson balladée'' or ''ballade'', which were originally "dancing songs". Ballads were particularly characteristic of the popular poetry and song of the British Isles from the later medieval period until the 19th century and used extensively across Europe and later the Americas, Australia and North Africa.Many ballads were written and sold as single sheet broadsides. The form was often used by poets and composers from the 18th century onwards to produce lyrical ballads. In the later 19th century the term took on the meaning of a slow form of popular love song and is now often used for any love song, particularly the pop or rock sentimental ballad.OriginsFile:Here begynneth a gest of Robyn Hode.png|thumb|upright|A sixteenth-century printed ballad, the A Gest of Robyn HodeThe ballad derives its name from medieval French dance songs or "ballares" (L: ''ballare'', to dance),W. Apel, ''Harvard Dictionary of Music'' (Harvard, 1944; 2nd edn., 1972), p. 70. from which 'ballet' is also derived, as did the alternative rival form that became the French ballade. As a narrative song, their theme and function may originate from Scandinavian and Germanic traditions of storytelling that can be seen in poems such as Beowulf. Musically they were influenced by the Minnesinger. The earliest example of a recognisable ballad in form in England is "Judas" in a 13th-century manuscript.A. N. Bold, ''The Ballad'' (Routledge, 1979), p. 5.Ballad formAABA formBallads were originally written to accompany dances, and so were composed in couplets with refrains in alternate lines. These refrains would have been sung by the dancers in time with the dance."Popular Ballads", ''The Broadview Anthology of British Literature: The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century'', p. 610. Most northern and west European ballads are written in ballad stanzas or quatrains (four-line stanzas) of alternating lines of iambic (an unstressed followed by a stressed syllable) tetrameter (eight syllables) and iambic trimeter (six syllables), known as ballad meter. Usually, only the second and fourth line of a quatrain are rhymed (in the scheme a, b, c, b), which has been taken to suggest that, originally, ballads consisted of couplets (two lines) of rhymed verse, each of 14 syllables.D. Head and I. Ousby, ''The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English'' (Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 66. This can be seen in this stanza from "Lord Thomas and Fair Annet":The '''horse''' | fair '''Ann''' | et '''rode''' | up'''on''' |He '''amb''' | led '''like''' | the '''wind''' |,With '''sil''' | ver '''he''' | was '''shod''' | be'''fore''',With '''burn''' | ing '''gold''' | be'''hind''' |.Houseman1952There is considerable variation on this pattern in almost every respect, including length, number of lines and rhyming scheme, making the strict definition of a ballad extremely difficult. In southern and eastern Europe, and in countries that derive their tradition from them, ballad structure differs significantly, like Spanish ''romanceros'', which are octosyllabic and use consonance rather than rhyme.T. A. Green, ''Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art'' (ABC-CLIO, 1997), p. 81.Ballads usually use the common dialect of the people and are heavily influenced by the region in which they originate. Scottish ballads in particular are distinctively un-English, even showing some pre-Christian influences in the inclusion of supernatural elements such as the fairies in the Scottish ballad "Tam Lin"."Popular Ballads" ''The Broadview Anthology of British Literature: The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century'', pp. 610-17. The ballads do not have any known author or  correct version; instead, having been passed down mainly by oral tradition since the Middle Ages, there are many variations of each. The ballads remained an oral tradition until the increased interest in folk songs in the 18th century led collectors such as Bishop Thomas Percy to publish volumes of popular ballads."British Literature pg 610"In all traditions most ballads are narrative in nature, with a self-contained story, often concise, and rely on imagery, rather than description, which can be tragic, historical, romantic or comic."I. Ousby, 2006 p. 66"Themes concerning rural laborers and their sexuality are common, and there are many ballads based on the Robin Hood legend. Another common feature of ballads is repetition, sometimes of fourth lines in succeeding stanzas, as a refrain, sometimes of third and fourth lines of a stanza and sometimes of entire stanzas.Houseman1952CompositionA copy of Walter Scott's ''The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border''.Scholars of ballads are often divided into two camps: the ‘communalists’ who, following the line established by the German scholar Johann Gottfried Herder (1744–1803) and the Brothers Grimm, argue that ballads arose by a combined communal effort and did not have a single author, and ‘individualists’, following the thinking of English collector Cecil Sharp, who assert that there was a single original author."N. Bold, 1979 p. 5"The communalist position tends to lead to the view that more recent, particularly printed broadside ballads, where the author is known, are a debased form of the genre. The individualists' position has tended to lead to the view that later changes in the words of ballads are corruptions of an original text.M. Hawkins-Dady, ''Reader's Guide to Literature in English'' (Taylor ; Francis, 1996), p. 54. More recently scholars have pointed to the interchange of oral and written forms of the ballad.T. A. Green, ''Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art'' (ABC-CLIO, 1997), p. 353.TransmissionThe transmission of ballads comprises a key stage in their re-composition. In romantic terms this process is often dramatized as a narrative of degeneration away from the pure 'folk memory' or 'immemorial tradition.' In the introduction to ''The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border'' (1802) the romantic writer Walter Scott noted the need to 'remove obvious corruptions' in order to attempt to restore the original. For Scott, the process of multiple recitations 'incurs the risk of impertinent interpolations from the conceit of one rehearser, unintelligible blunders from the stupidity of another, and omissions equally to be regretted, from the want of memory of a third.' Similarly, John Robert Moore noted 'a natural tendency to oblivescence'."The Influence of transmission on the English Ballads", ''Modern Language Review'' 11 (1916), p. 387. According to Scott, transcribed ballads often have a 'flatness and insipidity' compared to their oral counterparts.ClassificationFile:Illustration to the ballad Young Beckie from "Some British Ballads".jpg|right|thumb|Illustration by Arthur Rackham to ''Young Bekie.'' European Ballads have been generally classified into three major groups: traditional, broadside and literary. In America a distinction is drawn between ballads that are versions of European, particularly British and Irish songs, and 'Native American ballads', developed without reference to earlier songs. A further development was the evolution of the blues ballad, which mixed the genre with Afro-American music. For the late 19th century the music publishing industry found a market for what are often termed sentimental ballads, and these are the origin of the modern use of the term 'ballad' to mean a slow love song.Traditional balladsChild BalladsThe traditional, classical or popular (meaning of the people) ballad has been seen as beginning with the wandering minstrels of late medieval Europe.Houseman1952From the end of the 15th century there are printed ballads that suggest a rich tradition of popular music. A reference in William Langland's ''Piers Plowman'' indicates that ballads about Robin Hood were being sung from at least the late 14th century and the oldest detailed material is Wynkyn de Worde's collection of Robin Hood ballads printed about 1495.Early collections of English ballads were made by Samuel Pepys (1633–1703) and in the Roxburghe Ballads collected by Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Mortimer (1661–1724).Sweers2005In the 18th century there were increasing numbers of such collections, including Thomas d'Urfey's ''Wit and Mirth: or, Pills to Purge Melancholy'' (1719–20) and Bishop Thomas Percy's ''Reliques of Ancient English Poetry'' (1765).Sweers2005The last of these also contained some oral material and by the end of the 18th century this was becoming increasingly common, with collections including John Ritson's, ''The Bishopric Garland'' (1784), which paralleled the work of Walter Scott and Robert BurnsSweers2005who, in Scotland, collected and compiled major collections of Border ballad and Scottish song in Scott's ''Minstrelsy'' and through Burns' contributions to James Johnson's ''Scots Musical Museum'' and George Thomson's ''Scottish Airs''. Both northern English and Southern Scots shared in the identified tradition of Border ballads, including what is often said to be the finest, ‘The Ballad of Chevy Chase', thought to have been composed by the Lancashire-born sixteenth-century minstrel Richard Sheale.D. Gregory, ‘“The Songs of the People for Me’’: The Victorian Rediscovery of Lancashire Vernacular Song’, ''Canadian Folk Music/Musique folklorique canadienne'', 40 (2006), pp. 12-21.It has been suggested that the increasing interest in traditional popular ballads during the eighteenth century was prompted by social issues such as the enclosure movement as many of the ballads deal with themes concerning rural laborers. James Davey has suggested that the common themes of sailing and naval battles may also have prompted the use (at least in England) of popular ballads as naval recruitment tools.Key work on the traditional ballad was undertaken in the late 19th century in Denmark by Svend Grundtvig and for England and Scotland by the Harvard professor Francis James Child."N. Bold, 1979 p. 5"They attempted to record and classify all the known ballads and variants in their chosen regions. Since Child died before writing a commentary on his work it is uncertain exactly how and why he differentiated the 305 ballads printed that would be published as ''The English and Scottish Popular Ballads''. There have been many different and contradictory attempts to classify traditional ballads by theme, but commonly identified types are the religious, supernatural, tragic, love ballads, historic, legendary and humorous.Houseman1952BroadsidesBroadside (music)An 18th-century broadside ballad: ''The tragical ballad: or, the lady who fell in love with her serving-man''.Broadside ballads (also known as 'broadsheet’, ‘stall’, ‘vulgar’ or ‘come all ye’ ballads) were a product of the development of cheap print in the 16th century. They were generally printed on one side of a medium to large sheet of poor quality paper. In their heyday of the first half of the 17th century, they were printed in black-letter or gothic type and included multiple, eye-catching illustrations, a popular tune tile, as well as an alluring poem.E. Nebeker, , ''English Broadside Ballad Archive, University of California-Santa Barbara'', retrieved 15 August 2011. By the 18th century, they were printed in white letter or roman type and often without much decoration (as well as tune title). These later sheets could include many individual songs, which would be cut apart and sold individually as "slipsongs." Alternatively, they might be folded to make small cheap books or "chapbooks" which often drew on ballad stories.G. Newman and L. E. Brown, ''Britain in the Hanoverian Age, 1714-1837: An Encyclopedia'' (Taylor ; Francis, 1997), pp. 39-40. They were produced in huge numbers, with over 400,000 being sold in England annually by the 1660s.B. Capp, ‘Popular literature’, in B. Reay, ed., ''Popular Culture in Seventeenth-Century England'' (Routledge, 1985), p. 199. Tessa Watt estimates the number of copies sold may have been in the millions. Many were sold by travelling chapmen in city streets or at fairs. The subject matter varied from what has been defined as the traditional ballad, although many traditional ballads were printed as broadsides. Among the topics were love, marriage, religion, drinking-songs, legends, and early journalism, which included disasters, political events and signs, wonders and prodigies.B. Capp, ‘Popular literature’, in B. Reay, ed., ''Popular Culture in Seventeenth-Century England'' (Routledge, 1985), p. 204.Literary balladsLiterary or lyrical ballads grew out of an increasing interest in the ballad form among social elites and intellectuals, particularly in the Romantic movement from the later 18th century. Respected literary figures like Robert Burns and Sir Walter Scott in Scotland both collected and wrote their own ballads, using the form to create an artistic product. Similarly in England William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge produced a collection of Lyrical Ballads in 1798, including Coleridge’s ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’. The Romantics such as Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Keats were attracted to the simple and natural style of these folk ballads, encouraging them to imitate the style "Popular Ballads", ''The Broadview Anthology of British Literature'', p. 610. At the same time in Germany Goethe cooperated with Schiller on a series of ballads, some of which were later set to music by Schubert. Later important examples of the poetic form included Rudyard Kipling’s ‘Barrack-Room Ballads’ (1892-6) and Oscar Wilde’s ‘The Ballad of Reading Gaol’ (1897).S. Ledger, S. McCracken, ''Cultural Politics at the Fin de Siècle'' (Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 152. Victorian and late Romantic poets such as Christina Rossetti deployed ballad forms to explore spiritual and moral issues and used the form to discuss the stereotypical treatment and representation of men and women's roles in society.Ballad operasBallad operaImage:William Hogarth 016.jpg|thumb|200px|Painting based on ''The Beggar's Opera'', Act III Scene 2, William Hogarth, c. 1728In the 18th century ballad operas developed as a form of English stage entertainment, partly in opposition to the Italian domination of the London operatic scene. It consisted of racy and often satirical spoken (English) dialogue, interspersed with songs that are deliberately kept very short to minimize disruptions to the flow of the story. Rather than the more aristocratic themes and music of the Italian opera, the ballad operas were set to the music of popular folk songs and dealt with lower-class characters., ''Encyclopedia Britanica'', retrieved 7 April 2015. Subject matter involved the lower, often criminal, orders, and typically showed a suspension (or inversion) of the high moral values of the Italian opera of the period. The first, most important and successful was ''The Beggar's Opera'' of 1728, with a libretto by John Gay and music arranged by John Christopher Pepusch, both of whom probably influenced by Parisian vaudeville and the burlesques and musical plays of Thomas d'Urfey (1653–1723), a number of whose collected ballads they used in their work. Gay produced further works in this style, including a sequel under the title ''Polly''. Henry Fielding, Colley Cibber, Arne, Dibdin, Arnold, Shield, Jackson of Exeter, Hook and many others produced ballad operas that enjoyed great popularity. Ballad opera was attempted in America and Prussia. Later it moved into a more pastoral form, like Isaac Bickerstaffe's ''Love in a Village'' (1763) and William Shield|Shield’s ''Rosina'' (1781), using more original music that imitated, rather than reproduced, existing ballads. Although the form declined in popularity towards the end of the 18th century its influence can be seen in light operas like that of Gilbert and Sullivan's early works like ''The Sorcerer'' as well as in the modern musical. In the 20th century, one of the most influential plays, Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht's (1928) ''The Threepenny Opera'' was a reworking of ''The Beggar's Opera'', setting a similar story with the same characters, and containing much of the same satirical bite, but only using one tune from the original.K. Lawrence, ''Decolonizing Tradition: New Views of Twentieth-century "British" Literary Canons'' (University of Illinois Press, 1992), p. 30. The term ballad opera has also been used to describe musicals using folk music, such as ''The Martins and the Coys'' in 1944, and Peter Bellamy's ''The Transports'' in 1977. The satiric elements of ballad opera can be seen in some modern musicals such as ''Chicago'' and ''Cabaret''.Beyond EuropeNative American balladsImage:John Henry-27527.jpg|thumb|right|Statue of John Henry outside the town of Talcott in Summers County, West VirginiaNative American ballads are ballads that are native to North America (not to be confused with ballads performed by Native Americans).Cohen2005Some 300 ballads sung in North America have been identified as having origins in British traditional or broadside ballads. Examples include ‘The Streets of Laredo’, which was found in Britain and Ireland as ‘The Unfortunate Rake’; however, a further 400 have been identified as originating in North America, including among the best known, ‘The Ballad of Davy Crockett' and 'Jesse James'.Cohen2005They became an increasing area of interest for scholars in the 19th century and most were recorded or catalogued by George Malcolm Laws, although some have since been found to have British origins and additional songs have since been collected.Cohen2005They are usually considered closest in form to British broadside ballads and in terms of style are largely indistinguishable, however, they demonstrate a particular concern with occupations, journalistic style and often lack the ribaldry of British broadside ballads."A. Green, 1997 p. 353"Blues balladsBlues balladThe blues ballad has been seen as a fusion of Anglo-American and Afro-American styles of music from the 19th century. Blues ballads tend to deal with active protagonists, often anti-heroes, resisting adversity and authority, but frequently lacking a strong narrative and emphasising character instead.Cohen2005They were often accompanied by banjo and guitar which followed the blues musical format."A. Green, 1997 p. 353"The most famous blues ballads include those about John Henry and Casey Jones.Cohen2005Bush balladsBush balladFile:The Old Bush Songs by Banio Paterson.jpg|thumb|right|200px|Cover to Banjo Paterson's seminal 1905 collection of bush ballads, entitled ''The Old Bush Songs''The ballad was taken to Australia by early settlers from Britain and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback. The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush, and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards.Kerry O'Brien December 10, 2003 7:30 Report, [abc.net.au] The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia."abc.net.au"The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing, wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike, class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly, as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking. The most famous bush ballad is "Waltzing Matilda",  which has been called "the unofficial national anthem of Australia".[Who'll come a waltzing Matilda with me?"], The National Library of Australia, retrieved 14 March 2008.Sentimental balladsSentimental balladSentimental ballads, sometimes called "tear-jerkers" or "drawing-room ballads" owing to their popularity with the middle classes, had their origins in the early "Tin Pan Alley" music industry of the later 19th century. They were generally sentimental, narrative, strophic songs published separately or as part of an opera (descendants perhaps of broadside ballads, but with printed music, and usually newly composed). Such songs include "Little Rosewood Casket" (1870), "After the Ball" (1892) and "Danny Boy".Cohen2005The association with sentimentality led to the term "ballad" being used for a slow love songs from the 1950s onwards. Modern variations include "jazz ballads", "pop ballads" and "power ballads".See also* Corrido and Narcocorrido* Graves, Alfred Perceval* List of the Child Ballads* List of folk song collections* List of Irish ballads* List of rock ballads* Murder ballad* Roud Folk Song Index* Song structure (popular music)* Torch song* VaarNotes2References and further reading* Dugaw, Dianne. ''Deep Play: John Gay and the Invention of Modernity''. Newark, Del.: University of Delaware Press, 2001. Print.* Middleton, Richard. "Popular Music (I)". ''[Grove Music Online]'' ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.* Randel, Don (1986). ''The New Harvard Dictionary of Music''. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-61525-5.* Temperley, Nicholas. "Ballad (II, 2)". ''[Grove Music Online]'' ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.* Winton, Calhoun. ''John Gay and the London Theatre''. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1993. Print.* Witmer, Robert. "Ballad (jazz)". ''[Grove Music Online]'' ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.* Marcello Sorce Keller, "Sul castel di mirabel: Life of a Ballad in Oral Tradition and Choral Practice", Ethnomusicology, XXX(1986), no. 3, 449- 469.External linksBalladsBallads