:''For other uses, including other legal terms, see Barratry'''''Barratry''' ( ) is a legal term with several meanings. In common law, barratry is the offense committed by people who are “overly officious in instigating or encouraging prosecution of groundless litigation” or who bring “repeated or persistent acts of litigation” for the purposes of profit or harassment.  It is a crime in some jurisdictions. If litigation is for the purpose of silencing critics, it is known as a strategic lawsuit against public participation (SLAPP). Jurisdictions that otherwise have no barratry laws may have SLAPP laws.International variationsAustraliaIn Australia, the term barratry is predominantly used in the first sense of a frivolous or harassing litigant. The concept has fallen into disuse in Australia.[Discussion Paper 36 (1994) - Barratry, Maintenance and Champerty]. Law Reform Commission, New South Wales. Accessed August 12, 2009.England and WalesIn England and Wales the common law offence of '''being a common barrator''' was abolished by section 13(1)(a) of the Criminal Law Act 1967.HistoryBeing a common barrator was an offence under the common law of England. It was classified as a misdemeanor;;. It consisted of "persistently stirring up quarrels in the Courts or out of them". It is doubtful whether in the ordinary way persons charged with commission of this offence were dealt with by indictment.The Law Commission, [Proposals to Abolish Certain Ancient Criminal Offences] (Law Com 3), paragraph 2In 1966 the Law Commission recommended that this offence be abolished.The Law Commission, [Proposals to Abolish Certain Ancient Criminal Offences] (Law Com 3), paragraphs 7 and 8 They said that there had been no indictments for this offence for "many years" and that, as an indictable misdemeanor, it was "wholly obsolete"."bailii.org"Their recommendation was implemented by the Criminal Law Act 1967.United StatesSeveral jurisdictions in the United States have declared barratry (in the sense of a frivolous or harassing litigant) to be a crime as part of their tort reform efforts.  For example, in the U.S. states of California,  Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Washington, barratry is a misdemeanor.''People v. Sanford'', 202 Cal. App. 3d Supp. 1 (1988); 18 Pa.C.S. 5109.  Okla. Stat. tit. 21 § 550-551. In Texas, however, barratry is a misdemeanor on the first conviction, but a felony on subsequent convictions.* California Penal Code Section 158: "Common barratry is the practice of exciting groundless judicial proceedings, and is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months and by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000)."* California Penal Code Section 159: "No person can be convicted of common barratry except upon proof that he has excited suits or proceedings at law in at least three instances, and with a corrupt or malicious intent to vex and annoy."* Revised Code of Washington 9.12.010: "Every person who brings on his or her own behalf, or instigates, incites, or encourages another to bring, any false suit at law or in equity in any court of this state, with intent thereby to distress or harass a defendant in the suit, or who serves or sends any paper or document purporting to be or resembling a judicial process, that is not in fact a judicial process, is guilty of a misdemeanor; and in case the person offending is an attorney, he or she may, in addition thereto be disbarred from practicing law within this state."[RCW 9.12.010 Barratry], Revised Code of Washington. Accessed 2012-3-3.OtherIn his ''Inferno'', Canto XXI, Dante places barrators in the Eighth Circle, fifth bolgia of Hell.See also*Abuse of process*Ambulance chasing*Champerty*Collegatary*Forum shopping*In terrorem*Legal threat*Legal advertising*Malicious prosecution*Strategic lawsuit against public participation*Vexatious litigation*frivolous or vexatious*Isaac Wunder orderReferencesExternal links