'''Bassas da India''' is an uninhabited, roughly circular atoll that is part of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands. Located in the southern Mozambique Channel, about halfway between Mozambique and Madagascar (about  further east) and around  northwest of Europa Island, the rim of the atoll averages around 100m in width and encloses a shallow lagoon of depth no greater than 15m. Overall, the atoll is about  in diameter, rising steeply from the seabed 3000m below to encircle an area (including lagoon) of . Its Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ),  in size, is contiguous with that of Europa Island.The atoll consists of ten barren rocky islets, with no vegetation, totalling 0.2km² (.077 sq mi) in area. Those on the north and east sides are 2.1 to 3m high, while those on the west and south sides are 1.2m high. The reef, whose coastline measures , is completely covered by the sea from three hours before high tide to three hours afterward. The region is also subject to cyclones, making the atoll a long-time maritime hazard and the site of numerous shipwrecks.Jaguar Seamount and Hall Tablemount lie, respectively, about 40 and 70km further southwest.GalleryFile:Bassas da India atoll map-fr.png|Detailed map.File:Bassas_da_india.jpg|ISS photograph.File:Bassas da India.png|Landsat 7 image.File:Bassas da India-CIA WFB Map.png|CIA WFB map.File:Bassas da india 76.jpg|CIA map.File:Bassas da India in Sunglint.jpg|ISS image of Bassas da India with varying degrees of sunglint.HistoryThe Bassas da India was first recorded by Portuguese explorers in the early sixteenth century as the "'''''Baixo da'' Judia'''" ("''Jewess'' Shoals"). The ''Judia'' ("''Jewess''", for the ancestry of its owner Fernão de LoronhaBernardo Gomes de Brito. ''Historia Tragico-Maritima. Em que se escrevem chronologicamente os Naufragios que tiverão as Naos de Portugal, depois que se poz em exercicio a Navegação da India.'' Lisboa 1735) was the Portuguese ship that discovered the feature by running aground on it in 1506. The name became "'''Bassas da India'''" due to transcription errors by cartographers. The ''Santiago'' broke up on the shoal in 1585.It was rediscovered by the ''Europa'' in 1774, whence the name "Europa Rocks"."...Europa [R]ocks, was  discovered by the ship ''Europa'' in 1774." In ''Africa pilot, Part 3'' Hydrographic Office of Great Britain. The ''Malay'' was lost 27 July 1842 on the Europa Rocks.In 1897, the shoal became a French possession, later being placed under the administration of a commissioner residing in Réunion in 1968. Madagascar and Mozambique continue to claim sovereignty over the islands.TourismMooring at Bassas da India requires a permit from the French Government.  Fishing without such a permit may result in the boat being expelled or even confiscated.Several illegal tourism charters departing from Mozambique or South Africa have been seized since 2013 by the French navy.ReferencesExternal linksBassas da India*Bassas da India**[Sailing Directions: East Africa and the South Indian Ocean]*French Southern and Antarctic Lands.UninhabitedCategory:France–Madagascar relations