'''''Batman ; Robin''''' is a 1997 American superhero film based on the DC Comics character Batman. It is the fourth and final installment of Warner Bros.' initial ''Batman'' film series. The film was directed by Joel Schumacher and written by Akiva Goldsman. It stars George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Uma Thurman, and Alicia Silverstone.''Batman ; Robin'' tells the story of the Dynamic Duo as they attempt to prevent Mr. Freeze and Poison Ivy from freezing all mankind to death and repopulating the earth with mutant plants, while at the same time struggling to keep their partnership together. This is also the only film appearance of Batgirl, who helps the title characters win in the end.Warner Bros. fast tracked development for ''Batman ; Robin'' following the box office success of the previous film, ''Batman Forever''. Schumacher and Goldsman conceived the storyline during pre-production on ''A Time to Kill'', while Val Kilmer decided not to reprise the role over scheduling conflicts with ''The Saint''. Schumacher had a strong interest in casting William Baldwin in Kilmer's place before George Clooney won the role. Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule.''Batman ; Robin'' went into general release on June 20, 1997 in North America and performed modestly at the box office. Budgeted between $125–140 million, the film grossed over $238 million worldwide. Due to the film's lackluster critical reception, Warner Bros. quietly canceled a sequel, titled ''Batman Triumphant'', and later rebooted the film series with ''Batman Begins'' in 2005. One of the songs recorded for the film, "The End Is the Beginning Is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins, won a Grammy Award for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 40th Grammy Awards.Plot;;Batman and Robin fail to stop Mr. Freeze from stealing a cache of diamonds. They learn that Freeze was once a scientist named Victor Fries, who became dependent on a diamond-powered subzero suit following an accident in a cryogenics lab while working to save his wife, Nora, from a terminal illness called MacGregor's Syndrome.Meanwhile, botanist Dr. Pamela Isley is experimenting with the strength serum "Venom" to create mutant plants capable of fighting back against mankind. She is angry that her senior colleague Dr. Jason Woodrue used her Venom to transform a diminutive prisoner into the "super soldier" Bane. She refuses to partner with Woodrue so he tries to kill her with animal-plant toxins and chemicals, causing her to transform into the beautiful Poison Ivy. She kills Woodrue with a venomous kiss and vows to establish botanical supremacy over the world.Alfred Pennyworth's niece Barbara Wilson makes a surprise visit from England and is invited to stay at Wayne Manor. Later, Barbara finds the Batcave and creates her own crime-fighting persona with the help of a computer simulation of Alfred. The real Alfred is suffering from MacGregor's Syndrome. He is, however, in stage 1, for which Mr. Freeze has developed a cure despite being unable to cure his wife's condition because it is too advanced.Ivy arrives in Gotham City with Bane as her henchman. She interrupts a Wayne Enterprises press conference at the Gotham Observatory where a giant telescope is being unveiled. Ivy demands Bruce Wayne use his fortune to safeguard the natural environment at the expense of millions of human lives, and Bruce refuses.Ivy appears at the Gotham Botanical Gardens fundraiser, seducing everyone present with her pheromone dust, including the Dynamic Duo, who are there to protect a diamond from Mr. Freeze. When Freeze crashes the event Ivy is instantly captivated by his "ruthless charm". Freeze is captured by Batman and detained at the Arkham Asylum but is released by Ivy.Ivy turns off Nora Fries' life support and makes Freeze believe Batman did it, persuading him that they should destroy Batman along with the society that created him. They plan to turn the observatory's new telescope into a giant freeze ray to kill all humanity to allow Ivy's mutant plants to take over the world.Meanwhile, Robin is under Ivy's seductive spell and is rebelling against Batman. Robin goes to meet Ivy at her garden hideout, where her venomous kiss fails to kill Robin because Batman had prevailed on him to coat his lips with rubber. Ivy tries to drown Robin in her lily pond and entangles Batman in her crushing vines, but they are able to free themselves when Batgirl arrives and traps Ivy in her own floral throne.Batgirl reveals herself as Barbara. The three crime-fighters arrive at the Observatory to stop Freeze who has already frozen all of Gotham. Bane attacks Robin and Batgirl, but they incapacitate him and restore him to his original human state. Robin and Batgirl save Gotham by using the observatory's satellites to reflect sunlight from outer space to thaw the city.Batman shows Freeze video proof that Ivy pulled the plug on Nora and reveals that Batman was the one who saved her. He vows that Freeze will be allowed to continue his research at Arkham Asylum to cure Nora. Batman asks Freeze for his cure for the first stage of MacGregor's Syndrome for Alfred and Freeze atones for his misdeeds by giving him two vials of the medicine.At Arkham, Ivy is joined in her cell by Freeze, who vows to exact revenge on her. Back at Wayne Manor, Alfred is cured and Bruce invites Barbara to live with them, joining Batman and Robin to fight crime as Batgirl.Cast* George Clooney as Batman|Bruce Wayne / Batman ;brA billionaire industrialist who witnessed his parents' murder as a young boy. At night, Bruce becomes Batman, Gotham City's vigilante protector.**Eric Lloyd portrays him as a child in a flashback.* Arnold Schwarzenegger as Mr. Freeze|Dr. Victor Fries / Mr. Freeze  A Nobel Prize-winning molecular biologist and two-time Olympic decathlete who suffers a terrible accident while trying to cryogenically preserve his terminally ill wife. As a result, he is transformed into a criminal forced to live in a special sub-zero suit powered by diamonds.* Chris O'Donnell as Dick Grayson|Dick Grayson / Robin;brThe crime-fighting partner to Batman and ward of Bruce Wayne. He has begun to chafe against Batman's authority.* Uma Thurman as Poison Ivy (comics)|Dr. Pamela Isley / Poison Ivy  A botanist who becomes a crazed eco-terrorist after being pushed into vials of chemicals, poisons and toxins. Her lips are filled with venom as a result of the toxins, making her kiss deadly.* Alicia Silverstone as Barbara Wilson / Batgirl  Her parents had previously died in a car accident.  Alfred, her uncle, was very close to her mother, Margaret. She is Alfred's niece and is an orphan.* Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth  The trusted butler for Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson. Alfred is dying of a rare disease from which Mr. Freeze's wife also suffers.* Pat Hingle as Commissioner James Gordon  The police commissioner of Gotham City. He is close to Batman and informs him of numerous crimes.* John Glover as Dr. Jason Woodrue  A deranged scientist who aims to create Venom-powered "supersoldiers" to sell to dictators and warlords in order to make millions. He is responsible for the creation of both Bane and Poison Ivy, the latter of whom kills him with a kiss from her toxic lips.* Elle Macpherson as Julie Madison  Bruce Wayne's girlfriend. She proposes to Bruce, but he does not respond, fearing for her safety.* Vivica A. Fox as Ms. B. Haven  Mr. Freeze's sexy assistant who flirts with him constantly. He is unresponsive, as he is still in love with his wife.* Robert "Jeep" Swenson as Bane (comics)|Antonio Diego / Bane  Poison Ivy's bodyguard and muscle, who was originally a diminutive serial murderer. Transformed into a hugely powerful "Super-soldier" by the strength-enhancing drug "Venom", he was seen getting Mr. Freeze's suit back from Arkham Asylum, as well as fighting against the main heroes several times. Despite proving more than a match for Batman and Robin earlier on, he is eventually defeated by Robin and Batgirl after they find a way to stop the venom flow to his brain.**Michael Reid MacKay portrays him in flashbacks prior to his transformation.* Vendela Kirsebom as Nora Fries  Mr. Freeze's cryogenically-frozen wife.* Elizabeth Sanders as Gossip Gerty  Gotham's top gossip columnist.* Jesse Ventura as Arkham Asylum Guard* Patrick Leahy as himselfProductionDevelopmentWith the box office success of ''Batman Forever'' in June 1995, Warner Bros. immediately commissioned a sequel.helmThey hired director Joel Schumacher and writer Akiva Goldsman to reprise their duties the following August,shadowand decided it was best to fast track production for a June 1997 target release date, which is a break from the usual 3-year gap between films. Schumacher wanted to homage both the broad camp style of the 1960s television series and the work of Dick Sprang. The storyline of ''Batman ; Robin'' was conceived by Schumacher and Goldsman during pre-production on ''A Time to Kill''. Portions of Mr. Freeze's back-story were based on the ''Batman: The Animated Series'' episode "Heart of Ice", written by Paul Dini.Paul Dini, ''Batman ; Robin: The Heroes'', 2005, Warner Home VideoWhile Chris O'Donnell reprises the role of Robin, Val Kilmer decided not to reprise the role of Batman from ''Batman Forever''. Schumacher admitted he had difficulty working with Kilmer on ''Forever''. "He sort of quit," Schumacher said, "and we sort of fired him." Kilmer said he was not aware of the fast track production and was already committed to ''The Saint'' (1997).shadowSchumacher originally had a strong interest in casting William Baldwin in Kilmer's place, but George Clooney was cast instead. Schumacher believed Clooney could provide a lighter interpretation of the character than Michael Keaton (in ''Batman'' and ''Batman Returns'') and Kilmer.shadowThe shooting schedule allowed Clooney to simultaneously work on ''ER'' without any scheduling conflicts.mikePatrick Stewart was considered for the role of Mr. Freeze, before the script was rewritten to accommodate Arnold Schwarzenegger's casting. Schumacher decided that Mr. Freeze must be "big and strong like he was chiseled out of a glacier".shadowSchwarzenegger was paid a $25 million salary for the role. His prosthetic makeup and wardrobe took six hours to apply each day. Thurman took the role of Poison Ivy because she liked the femme fatale characterization of the character.shadowAlicia Silverstone was the only choice for the role of Batgirl.popLeonardo DiCaprio stated that he had a meeting with Schumacher about appearing in the film, but was ultimately not cast.FilmingThe original start date was August 1996,Valbut principal photography did not begin until September 12, 1996. ''Batman ; Robin'' finished filming in late January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule.mikeThe film was mostly shot at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California.shadowWhen comparing work on ''Batman Forever'', Chris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, explained, "It just felt like everything got a little soft the second time. On ''Batman Forever'', I felt like I was making a movie. The second time, I felt like I was making a kid's toy commercial."shadowHe also complained of the Robin costume, saying it was more involved and uncomfortable than the one he wore in ''Batman Forever'', with a glued-on mask which caused sweat to pool on his face. According to John Glover, who played Dr. Jason Woodrue, "Joel [Schumacher] would sit on a crane with a megaphone and yell before each take, 'Remember, everyone, this is a cartoon'. It was hard to act because that kind of set the tone for the film."shadowProduction designer Barbara Ling admitted her influences for the Gotham City design came from "neon-ridden Tokyo and the Machine Age. Gotham is like a World's Fair on ecstasy."Barbara Ling, ''Bigger, Bolder, Brighter: The Production Design of Batman ; Robin'', 2005, Warner Home Video Rhythm and Hues and Pacific Data Images created the visual effects sequences, with John Dykstra and Andrew Adamson credited as the visual effects supervisors.John Dykstra, Andrew Adamson, ''Freeze Frame: The Visual Effects of Batman ; Robin'', 2005, Warner Home VideoAccording to ''Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight Part 6: Batman Unbound'', Chris O'Donnell revealed that despite hanging out with Arnold Schwarzenegger a lot off set and during promotion for the film, they never worked a single day together. This was achieved with stand ins when one of the actors wasn't available.Stunt coordinator Alex Field taught Alicia Silverstone to ride a motorcycle so that she could play Batgirl."WizBox"MusicLike ''Batman Forever'', the original score for the film was written by Elliot Goldenthal. The soundtrack featured a variety of genres by various bands and performers, showcasing alternative rock on the lead single "The End Is the Beginning Is the End" by The Smashing Pumpkins, on the Goo Goo Dolls' contribution, "Lazy Eye" and with R.E.M.'s song "Revolution". R;B singer R. Kelly also wrote "Gotham City" for the soundtrack, which became the other song featured in the end credits, as well as one of the singles, reaching the top 10 in the United States and in the UK. Eric Benét and Meshell Ndegeocello also contributed R;B songs. Also included was the top 5 second single, "Look into My Eyes" by the hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony. Other songs featured included electronic dance elements, including those by Moloko and Arkana. The soundtrack was released on May 27, 1997, a month before the film.MarketingThe ''Batman ; Robin'' film trailer debuted on the February 19, 1997 episode of ''Entertainment Tonight''. Warner Bros. spent $15 million to market and promote the film, in addition to its $125 million production budget. The studio also brought in toy companies to be involved with pre-production, including the design of concept art and character illustrations. Director Joel Schumacher criticized Warner Bros.' strategy for ''Batman ; Robin'' as being overtly toyetic. Various Six Flags parks (Six Flags Great Adventure, Six Flags Over Texas, as well as Six Flags St. Louis) all debuted coasters themed to the film (all of which have since been closed or re-themed to ''Batman: The Animated Series'').shadowTaco Bell featured a promotional campaign including collectible cups and a contest with a replica of the film's Batmobile as a grand prize.ReceptionBox office''Batman ; Robin'' was released on June 20, 1997 in North America, earning $42,872,605 in its opening weekend, making it the third-highest opening weekend of 1997. The film declined by 63% in its second week. ''Batman ; Robin'' faced early competition with ''Face/Off'' and ''Hercules''.marketSchumacher blamed it on yellow journalism started by Harry Knowles of Ain't It Cool News and other film websites such as Dark Horizons. The film went on to gross $107.3 million in North America and $130.9 million internationally, coming to a worldwide total of $238.2 million.boxWarner Bros. acknowledged ''Batman ; Robin''s shortcomings in the domestic market but pointed out success overseas.marketCritical reactionThe film received mostly negative reviews on Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic, two of the most popular review aggregator websites. While some critics praised the production and costume designs of the film, criticism was mainly directed towards the film's script, campiness and acting. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 11% approval rating with an average rating of 3.7/10 based on 85 reviews. The website's consensus reads: "Joel Schumacher's tongue-in-cheek attitude hits an unbearable limit in ''Batman ; Robin'', resulting in a frantic and mindless movie that's too jokey to care much for." On Metacritic, the film achieved an average score of 28 out of 100 based on 21 reviews, signifying ;; "generally unfavorable reviews".Schumacher and producer Peter MacGregor-Scott blamed the negative reception of ''Batman ; Robin'' on Warner Bros.' decision to fast track production. "There was a lot of pressure from Warner Bros. to make ''Batman ; Robin'' more family-friendly," Schumacher explained. "We decided to do a less depressing ''Batman'' movie and less torture and more heroic. I know I have been criticized a lot for this, but I didn't see the harm in that approach at all."shadowRoger Ebert of the ''Chicago Sun-Times'' criticized the toyetic approach and Mr. Freeze's one-liner jokes in his two-star review of the film. Kenneth Turan of the ''Los Angeles Times'' believed the film "killed" the ''Batman'' film series, and felt ''Batman ; Robin'' depended too much on visual effects. Desson Thomson of ''The Washington Post'' largely disapproved of Schumacher's direction and Akiva Goldsman's script. Mick LaSalle, writing in the ''San Francisco Chronicle'', said, "George Clooney is the big zero of the film, and should go down in history as the George Lazenby of the series." However, Janet Maslin of ''The New York Times'' gave a positive review. She praised Uma Thurman's acting, as well as the production and costume design.''Batman ; Robin'' was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film, as well as Best Make-up and Best Costume, but won none. Alicia Silverstone won the Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress. Other nominations at the Razzie Awards included Schumacher (Worst Director), George Clooney and Chris O'Donnell (Worst Screen Couple), Akiva Goldsman (Worst Screenplay), both Chris O'Donnell and Arnold Schwarzenegger (Worst Supporting Actor), Uma Thurman (Worst Supporting Actress), as well as Billy Corgan (Worst Song for "The End Is the Beginning Is the End"). ''Batman ; Robin'' also received nominations for Worst Picture, Worst Remake or Sequel and Worst Reckless Disregard for Human Life and Public Property. Ultimately, out of 11 nominations, ''Batman ; Robin'' garnered only one Razzie Award.Many observers thought Schumacher added possible homoerotic innuendo in the storyline.shadowJames Berardinelli questioned the "random amount ''[sic]'' of rubber nipples and camera angle close-ups of the Dynamic Duo's butts and Bat-crotches." Similar to ''Batman Forever'', this primarily included the decision to add nipples and enlarged codpieces to Batman and Robin suits. Schumacher stated, "I had no idea that putting nipples on the Batsuit and Robin suit were going to spark international headlines. The bodies of the suits come from ancient Greek statues, which display perfect bodies. They are anatomically correct."shadowChris O'Donnell, who portrayed Robin, felt "it wasn't so much the nipples that bothered me. It was the codpiece. The press obviously played it up and made it a big deal, especially with Joel directing. I didn't think twice about the controversy, but going back and looking and seeing some of the pictures, it was very unusual."shadowGeorge Clooney joked, "Joel Schumacher told me we never made another ''Batman'' film because Batman was gay". Clooney himself has spoken critically of the film, saying, "I think we might have killed the franchise", and called it "a waste of money".Canceled sequel and later plansBatman in film#Batman TriumphantDuring the filming of ''Batman ; Robin'', Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies, prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to return as director for a sequel. However, writer Akiva Goldsman turned down an offer to write the script.mikeIn late 1996, Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth ''Batman'' film. A projected mid-1999 release date was announced. Titled ''Batman Triumphant'', Protosevich's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain. Through the use of his fear toxin, he resurrects the Joker as a hallucination in Batman's mind. Harley Quinn appeared as a supporting character, written as the Joker's daughter. George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, and Alicia Silverstone were set to reprise the roles of Batman, Robin, and Batgirl. However, following the failure of ''Batman ; Robin'', Clooney vowed never to reprise his role.Warner Bros. decided to consider a live-action ''Batman Beyond'' film and an adaptation of Frank Miller's ''Batman: Year One''. Warner would then produce whichever idea suited them the most.assSchumacher felt he "owe[d] the Batman culture a real ''Batman'' movie. I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight."JenHe approached Warner Bros. about doing ''Batman: Year One'' in mid-1998, but they were more interested in hiring Darren Aronofsky. Aronofsky and Frank Miller developed a ''Year One'' script with Aronofsky to direct, but it was ultimately canceled. Christopher Nolan was eventually hired to helm the next ''Batman'' film in January 2003, resulting in the rebooted ''Batman Begins'' (2005).In "Legends of the Dark Knight", an episode of ''The New Batman Adventures'', three teenagers discuss their ideas about what Batman is really like. They briefly meet a youth called Joel whose idea of Batman reflects characterizations and costumes portrayed within Schumacher's ''Batman and Robin''. The teens treat Joel's ideas with utter disdain."Legends of the Dark Knight". Dan Riba (director), Bruce Timm; Robert Goodman (writers). ''Batman: The Animated Series''. October 10, 1998. No. 19, season 2. In ''Watchmen'', director Zack Snyder and comic book artist Dave Gibbons chose to parody the molded muscle and nipple Batsuit design from ''Batman ; Robin'' for the Ozymandias costume. The film is referenced in the ''Batman: The Brave and the Bold'' episode "Legends of the Dark Mite!", when Bat-Mite briefly uses his powers to transform Batman's costume into the same suit shown in the Joel Schumacher ''Batman'' films, before declaring it "Too icky"."Legends of the Dark Mite!". Ben Jones (director), Paul Dini (writer). ''Batman: The Brave and the Bold''. May 29, 2009. No. 19, season 1. The Batman from ''Batman ; Robin'' later appeared as part of an army of Batmen gathered from across the Multiverse in "Night of the Batmen!", complete with the blue rubber Batsuit. Additionally, there were worries within Warner Bros. surrounding the negative critical reaction to ''Batman ; Robin'' and how that may come to harm the success of the subsequent direct-to-video animated film ''Batman ; Mr. Freeze: SubZero'', which was originally planned for release at around the same time as ''Batman ; Robin'' but was subsequently delayed. However, ''SubZero'' received a far stronger positive response from critics than ''Batman ; Robin'', with Mr. Freeze's role within it being seen in a much more positive light, returning his popularity as a ''Batman'' villain to a level comparable to that reached by him within the two Emmy-winning episodes the character featured in of ''Batman: The Animated Series''."stomptokyo1"See also1990s*Homosexuality in the Batman franchise*List of films featuring powered exoskeletons*List of films considered the worstReferences30emExternal links******** at RiffTrax;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;