biathle'''Biathlon''' is a winter sport that combines cross-country skiing and rifle shooting.HistoryThis sport has its origins in an exercise for Norwegian people, as an alternative training for the military. Norwegian skiing regiments organized military skiing contests in the 18th century, divided in four classes: shooting at mark while skiing at top speed, downhill race among trees, downhill race on big hills without falling, and a long race on flat ground while carrying rifle and military pack. In modern terminology these military contests included downhill, slalom, biathlon and cross-country skiing.Bergsland, Einar (1946): ''På ski.'' Oslo: Aschehoug. One of the world's first known ski clubs, the Trysil Rifle and Ski Club, was formed in Norway in 1861 to promote national defense at the local level. 20th century variants include Forsvarsrennet (the military contest) - a 17km cross-country race with shooting, and the military cross-country race at 30km including marksmanship. Modern biathlon is a civilian variant of the old military combined exercise.Bø, Olav: ''Skiing throughout history'', translated by W. Edson Richmond. Oslo: Samlaget, 1993. In Norway, biathlon was until 1984 a branch of ''Det frivillige Skyttervesen'', an organization set up by the government to promote civilian marksmanship in support of national defense. In Norwegian biathlon is called ''skiskyting'' (literally ''ski shooting''). In Norway there are still separate contests in ''skifeltskyting'', a cross-country race at 12km with large-caliber rifle shooting at various targets with unknown range.Called military patrol, the combination of skiing and shooting was contested at the Winter Olympic Games in 1924, and then demonstrated in 1928, 1936, and 1948, but did not regain Olympic recognition then, as the small number of competing countries disagreed on the rules. During the mid-1950s, however, biathlon was introduced into the Soviet and Swedish winter sport circuits and was widely enjoyed by the public. This newfound popularity aided the effort of having biathlon gain entry into the Winter Olympics.The first Biathlon World Championship was held in 1958 in Austria, and in 1960 the sport was finally included in the Olympic Games.IdrettsleksikonAt Albertville in 1992, women were first allowed in Olympic biathlon.The competitions from 1958 to 1965 used high-power centerfire cartridges, such as the .30-06Springfield and the 7.62×51mmNATO, before the .22Long Rifle rimfire cartridge was standardized in 1978. The ammunition was carried in a belt worn around the competitor's waist. The sole event was the men's km individual, encompassing four separate ranges and firing distances of m, m, m, and m. The target distance was reduced to m with the addition of the relay in 1966. The shooting range was further reduced to m in 1978 with the mechanical targets making their debut at the 1980Winter Olympics in Lake Placid.Governing body==;;In 1948, the ''Union Internationale de Pentathlon Moderne et Biathlon''(UIPMB) was founded, to standardise the rules for biathlon and modern pentathlon. In 1993, the biathlon branch of the UIPMB created the International Biathlon Union(IBU), which officially separated from the UIPMB in 1998.Presidents of the UIPMB/IBU:* 1947–1949: Tom Wiborn (Sweden)* 1949–1960: Gustaf Dyrssen (Sweden)* 1960–1988: Sven Thofelt, (Sweden)* 1988–1992: Igor Novikov (USSR/Russia)* Since1992: Anders Besseberg (Norway)ChampionshipsThe following articles list major international biathlon events and medalists. Contrary to the Olympics and World Championships (BWCH), the World Cup (BWC) is an entire winter season of (mostly) weekly races, where the medalists are those with the highest sums of World Cup points at the end of the season.* Biathlon at the Winter Olympics* Biathlon World Championships* Biathlon World Cup* Biathlon Junior World ChampionshipsRules and equipmentThe complete rules of biathlon are given in the official IBU rule books.[IBU rule books]Basic conceptsA biathlon competition consists of a race in which contestants ski around a cross-country trail system, and where the total distance is broken up by either two or four shooting rounds, half in prone position, the other half standing. Depending on the shooting performance, extra distance or time is added to the contestant's total running distance/time. The contestant with the shortest total time wins.For each shooting round, the biathlete must hit five targets; the skier receives a penalty for each missed target, which varies according to the competition rules, as follows:* Skiing around a  penalty loop—typically taking 20–30 seconds for elite biathletes to complete, depending on weather and snow conditions.* Adding one minute to the skier's total time.* Use of an extra cartridge (placed at the shooting range) to hit the target; only three such extras are available for each round, and a penalty loop must be made for each target left standing.In order to keep track of the contestants' progress and relative standing throughout a race, split times (intermediate times) are taken at several points along the skiing track and upon finishing each shooting round. The large display screens commonly set up at biathlon arenas, as well as the information graphics shown as part of the TV picture, will typically list the split time of the fastest contestant at each intermediate point and the times and time differences to the closest runners-up.Skiing detailsAll cross-country skiing techniques are permitted in biathlon, which means that the free technique is usually the preferred one, being the fastest. No equipment other than skis and ski poles may be used to move along the track. Minimum ski length is the height of the skier less in. The rifle has to be carried by the skier during the race at all times.Shooting detailsThe biathlete carries a small bore rifle, which weighs at least lb, excluding ammunition and magazines. The rifles use .22 LR ammunition and are bolt action or Fortner (straight-pull bolt) action.The target range shooting distance is ft. There are five circular targets to be hit in each shooting round. When shooting in the prone position the target diameter is in; when shooting in the standing position the target diameter is in. On all modern biathlon ranges, the targets are self-indicating, in that they flip from black to white when hit, giving the biathlete as well as the spectators instant visual feedback for each shot fired.Competition formatIndividualThe km individual race (km for women) is the oldest biathlon event; the distance is skied over five laps. The biathlete shoots four times at any shooting lane, in the order of prone, standing, prone, standing, totaling 20 targets. For each missed target a fixed penalty time, usually one minute, is added to the skiing time of the biathlete. Competitors' starts are staggered, normally by 30 seconds.SprintThe sprint is mi for men and mi for women; the distance is skied over three laps. The biathlete shoots twice at any shooting lane, once prone and once standing, for a total of 10 shots. For each miss, a penalty loop of m must be skied before the race can be continued. As in the individual competition, the biathletes start in intervals.PursuitOlympic gold medalists Olga Zaitseva and Andrea Henkel at the World Cup pursuit race in Oberhof, 2013.Pursuit racingIn a pursuit, biathletes' starts are separated by their time differences from a previous race,To be precise; the pursuit competition start intervals are determined by common rounding to the nearest whole second of the biathletes' time differences from the previous race the amount of time each biathlete lagged after the winner to the finish line. most commonly a sprint. The contestant crossing the finish line first is the winner. The distance is mi for men and mi for women, skied over five laps; there are four shooting bouts (two prone, two standing, in that order), and each miss means a penalty loop of m. To prevent awkward and/or dangerous crowding of the skiing loops, and overcapacity at the shooting range, World Cup Pursuits are held with only the 60 top ranking biathletes after the preceding race. The biathletes shoot on a first-come, first-served basis at the lane corresponding to the position they arrived for all shooting bouts.Mass startIn the mass start, all biathletes start at the same time and the first across the finish line wins. In this mi for men or mi for women competition, the distance is skied over five laps; there are four bouts of shooting (two prone, two standing, in that order) with the first shooting bout being at the lane corresponding to the competitor's bib number (Bib #10 shoots at lane #10 regardless of position in race), with the rest of the shooting bouts being on a first-come, first-served basis (If a competitor arrives at the lane in fifth place, they shoot at lane 5). As in sprint and pursuit, competitors must ski one m penalty loop for each miss. Here again, to avoid unwanted congestion, World Cup Mass starts are held with only the 30 top ranking athletes on the start line (half that of the Pursuit as here all contestants start simultaneously).RelayThe relay teams consist of four biathletes, who each ski mi (men) or mi (women), each leg skied over three laps, with two shooting rounds; one prone, one standing. For every round of five targets there are eight bullets available, though the last three can only be single-loaded manually one at a time from spare round holders or bullets deposited by the competitor into trays or onto the mat at the firing line. If after eight bullets there are still misses, one 150m (490ft) penalty loop must be taken for each missed target remaining. The first-leg participants start all at the same time, and as in cross-country skiing relays, every athlete of a team must touch the team's next-leg participant to perform a valid changeover. On the first shooting stage of the first leg, the participant must shoot in the lane corresponding to their bib number (Bib #10 shoots at lane #10 regardless of position in race), then for the remainder of the relay, the relay team shoots on a first-come, first-served basis (arrive at the range in fifth place, shoot at lane 5).Mixed relayThe most recent addition to the number of biathlon competition variants, the mixed relay is similar to the ordinary relay but the teams are composed of two women and two men.  Legs 1 and 2 are done by the women, legs 3 and 4 by the men. The women's legs are km and men's legs are km as in ordinary relay competitions.In 2014, single mixed relay was introduced by the IBU. Each team has a man and a woman, and each runs two km legs, except the last leg where the man completes km for a total km.Team (obsolete)A team consists of four biathletes, but unlike the relay competition, all team members start at the same time. Two athletes must shoot in the prone shooting round, the other two in the standing round. In case of a miss, the two non-shooting biathletes must ski a penalty loop of 150m (490ft). The skiers must enter the shooting area together, and must also finish within 15 seconds of each other; otherwise a time penalty of one minute is added to the total time. Since 2004, this race format has been obsolete at the World Cup level.BroadcastingBiathlon events are broadcast most regularly where the sport enjoys its greatest popularity, namely Germany (ARD, ZDF), Austria (ORF), Norway (NRK), Finland (YLE), Estonia (ETV), Latvia (LTV), Lithuania (LRT), Croatia (HRT), Poland (TVP), Sweden (SVT), Russia (Russia-2, Channel One), Belarus (TVR), Slovenia (RTV), Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHRT), Bulgaria (BNT), and South Korea (KBS);;; it is broadcast on European-wide Eurosport, which also broadcasts to the Asia-Pacific region. World Cup races are streamed (without commentary) via the IBU website.[Startseite - www.biathlonworld.com;;]The broadcast distribution being one indicator, the constellation of a sport's main sponsors usually gives a similar, and correlated, indication of popularity: for biathlon, these are the Germany-based companies E.ON Ruhrgas (energy), Krombacher (beer), and Viessmann (boilers and other heating systems).Image:Jeremy Teela 2002 Olympics.jpg|thumb|right|United States biathlete Jeremy Teela at the 2002 Winter Olympics.Biathlon records and statisticsBiathlon records, rules, news, videos, and statistics for many years back are available at the IBU (International Biathlon Union) web site Biathlonworld.ComBiathlon variantsTwo common variations on traditional winter biathlon are summer biathlon, where skiing is replaced by a cross-country running or roller-skiing, and archery biathlon (ski archery), where the rifle is replaced by a recurve bow.There have also been summer competitions in roller-ski biathlon, mountain bike biathlon, orienteering biathlon, and run archery. Primitive Biathlon uses snowshoes and muzzleloaders.The Boy Scouts of America offers a Bikeathlon variant at their national Scout jamboree that mixes BMX biking with air rifle shooting at biathlon type targets.[:: Crosman: Summer House - Bikathalon::;;]Cadets Canada also offers biathlon to cadets across Canada, with three stages: zones, provincial, and national. Zone competitions are occasionally, due to lack of snow in some southern areas, held as summer biathlon. A .22LR caliber rifle is used at all levels. Races are shorter than world class events.[National Cadet Biathlon Championship - 2007 - Championnat national de biathlon des cadets;;]The World Police and Fire Games offer a summer variant which combines cross-country running with service pistol shooting.The Russian Military runs tank biathlon competitions.See also* Biathlon World Cup* Biathlon World Championships* List of Olympic medalists in biathlon* Paralympic biathlonBiathlon's two sports disciplines:* Cross-country skiing (sport)* Rifle shooting sportsOther multi-discipline sports (otherwise unrelated to biathlon):* Duathlon* Nordic Combined* Triathlon* Pentathlon* Modern pentathlon* Heptathlon* Decathlon* Chess boxing* Omnium (track cycling)Notes2External linksBiathlon