Image:Big-apple-corner.jpg|thumb|300px|right|"Big Apple Corner" at 54th Street and Broadway, in Manhattan's Theater District'''"Big Apple"''' is a nickname for New York City. It was first popularized in the 1920s by John J. Fitz Gerald, a sports writer for the ''New York Morning Telegraph''. Its popularity since the 1970s is due to a promotional campaign by the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau, known now as NYC ; Company.EtymologyAlthough the history of ''Big Apple '' was once thought a mystery,[Why is New York called the Big Apple?], The Straight Dope February 18, 1977. research – primarily by amateur etymologist Barry Popik[The Big Apple]. This web site, owned and maintained by Barry Popik, contains updated information reflecting research by Popik and others and includes the text of significant examples. and Gerald Cohen of Missouri University of Science and TechnologyGerald Cohen, ''Origin of New York City's Nickname "The Big Apple"'' (1991), ISBN 3-631-43787-0. – has provided a reasonably clear picture of the term's history. Previously, there were a number of false etymologies,[False Etymologies]. including a claim that the term derived from a New York brothel whose madam was known as Eve.[Is New York City Called "The Big Apple"?] Wayback Machine archive of earlier version of web page. This was subsequently exposed as a hoax[Big Apple Whore Hoax (1800s!)]. and has been replaced on the source website with more accurate information.[Why Is New York City Called "The Big Apple"?]Early mentionsThe earliest citation for "big apple" is the 1909 book ''The Wayfarer in New York'' by Edward S. Martin, writing: "Kansas is apt to see in New York a greedy city.... It inclines to think that '''the big apple''' gets a disproportionate share of the national sap" (emphasis added). William Safire considered this the coinage, but the ''Random House Dictionary of American Slang'' considers the usage "metaphorical or perhaps proverbial, rather than a concrete example of the later slang term", and Popik likewise does not consider this the coinage.Racing contextIn the early 1920s, "apple" was used in reference to the many racing courses in and around New York City. Apple referred to the prizes being awarded for the races – as these were important races, the rewards were substantial.''The Big Apple'' was first popularized as a reference to New York City by John J. Fitz Gerald in a number of ''New York Morning Telegraph'' articles in the 1920s in reference to New York horse-racing. The earliest of these was a casual reference on May 3, 1921:Fitz Gerald referred to the "big apple" frequently thereafter.[Numerous 1920s “Big Apple” citations in the New York Morning Telegraph]. He explained his use in a February 18, 1924, column under the headline "Around the Big Apple":Fitz Gerald's reference to the "dusky" stable hands suggests the term's origin may lie in African-American culture. Support for this is found in the ''Chicago Defender'', an African-American newspaper that had a national circulation. “Ragtime” Billy Tucker, a vaudeville/ragtime performer and writer for the ''Defender'', there used "big apple" to refer to New York in a non-horse-racing context on September 16, 1922:Tucker had earlier used "Big Apple" as a reference to a different city, Los Angeles.  This example, from May 15, 1920, is the earliest known use of "Big Apple" to refer to any city. ;; It is possible that the writer simply understood "Big Apple" as an appropriate nickname for any large city:Popularity and declineFile:Citi Field Home Run Apple 2012.jpg|right|thumb|250px|The New York Mets Home Run Apple located in Citi Field.By the late 1920s, New York writers other than Fitz Gerald were starting to use "Big Apple" and were using it outside of a horse-racing context.[1920s Non-Horseracing “Big Apple” Citations]. "The Big Apple" was a popular song[“Big Apple” song by Bob Emmerich]. and dance[“Big Apple” in the 1930s (Two clubs, plus song and dance)]. in the 1930s.  Walter Winchell and other writers continued to use the name in the 1940s and 1950s.[“Big Apple” in the 1940s-1950s].By the 1960s, "the Big Apple" was known only as an old name for New York.Kurt Vonnegut, ''Slaughterhouse-Five'' 265 (1969; Delta Trade Paperbacks ed. 1999) ("That's what they used to call New York"). In the early 1970s, however, the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau (now NYC ; Company, the official marketing and tourism organization for New York City),[About NYC and Company]. under the leadership of its president, Charles Gillett, began promoting "the Big Apple" for the city.[Big Apple 1970s Revival: Charlie Gillett and Lew Rudin]. It has remained popular since then. Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in 1997 signed legislation designating the southwest corner of West 54th Street and Broadway, the corner on which John J. Fitz Gerald lived from 1934 to 1963, as "Big Apple Corner"..In popular cultureThe term "big apple" was used by Frank Sinatra, who was speaking to opera singer Dorothy Kirsten, his co-star in a March 28, 1950 airing of the late 1940s-early 1950s NBC radio program ''Light Up Time".In ''Evita'', Buenos Aires is referred to as "B.A., Buenos Aires, Big Apple" in the song "Eva, Beware of the City". This reference was invented by lyricist Tim Rice and does not reflect preexisting use.The New York Mets have featured a "Home Run Apple" that rises whenever a Mets player hits a home run. It has become a symbol of the Mets baseball team, recognized throughout Major League Baseball as an iconic feature of the Mets' stadiums. It first appeared in Shea Stadium, and the original can still be seen on display at Citi Field, outside the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. Citi Field now uses a new apple, one that is nearly four times the size of the original.References30emExternal linksBig Apple