Blue Laws (Connecticut)'''Blue laws'''—known also as Sunday laws—are laws designed to restrict or ban some or all Sunday activities for religious reasons, particularly to promote the observance of a day of worship or rest. Blue laws may also restrict shopping or ban sale of certain items on specific days, most often on Sundays in the western world. Some Islamic nations may ban on Fridays. Blue laws are enforced in parts of the United States and Canada as well as some European countries, particularly in Austria, Germany, Switzerland, and Norway keeping most stores closed on SundaysIn the United States, the U.S. Supreme Court have held blue laws as constitutional numerous times citing secular basis, even though the origin of the blue laws were for religious purposes. Blue laws are technically classed as "mala prohibita," or "harms created solely by the act of legislation" (as opposed to "mala in se" or "inherent wrongs"). Most blue laws have been repealed in the United States, although many states still ban the sale of alcoholic beverages or cars on Sundays. Bergen County, New Jersey is notable for their blue laws banning the sale of clothing, shoes, furniture, home supplies and appliances on Sundays kept through county-wide referendum. Paramus, New Jersey has its own blue laws even more strict than the county itself, banning any type of secular employment on Sundays except necessity items such as food and gasoline.HistoryThe first occurrence of the phrase ''blue law'' so far found is in the ''New-York Mercury'' of March 3, 1755, where the writer imagines a future newspaper praising the revival of "our Connecticut's old Blue Laws". In his 1781 book ''General History of Connecticut'', the Reverend Samuel Peters (1735–1826) used it to describe various laws first enacted by Puritan colonies in the 17th century that prohibited various activities, recreational as well as commercial, on Sunday (Saturday evening through Sunday night). Sometimes the sale of certain types of merchandise was prohibited, and in some cases all retail and business activity.Contrary to popular belief, there is no evidence that blue laws were originally printed on blue paper. Rather, the word ''blue'' was used in the 17th century as a disparaging reference to rigid moral codes and those who observed them, particularly in ''blue-stocking'', a reference to Oliver Cromwell's supporters in the parliament of 1653. Moreover, although Reverend Peters claimed that the term ''blue law'' was originally used by Puritan colonists, his work has since been found to be unreliable.[Snopes.com: American "blue laws" were so named because they were originally printed on blue paper.]. Retrieved July 12, 2006. In any event, Peters never asserted that the blue laws were originally printed on blue paper, and this has come to be regarded as an example of false etymology, another version of which is that the laws were first bound in books with blue covers.As Protestant moral reformers organized the Sabbath reform in nineteenth-century America, calls for the enactment and/or enforcement of stricter Sunday laws developed. Numerous Americans were arrested for working, keeping an open shop, drinking alcohol, traveling, and recreating on Sundays. Beginning in the 1840s, Catholic immigrants, workingmen, Jews, Seventh Day Baptists, free-thinkers, and other groups began to organize opposition. Throughout the century, Sunday laws served as a major source of church-state controversy and as an issue that drove the emergence of modern American minority-rights politics.Kyle G. Volk (2014), ''''. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 019937192X.Many European countries still place strong restrictions on store opening hours on Sundays, an example being Germany's Ladenschlussgesetz.In Texas, for example, blue laws prohibited selling housewares such as pots, pans, and washing machines on Sunday until 1985. In Colorado, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota, Missouri, Oklahoma, New Jersey, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, car dealerships continue to operate under blue-law prohibitions in which an automobile may not be purchased or traded on a Sunday. Maryland permits Sunday automobile sales only in the counties of Charles, Prince George's, Montgomery, and Howard; similarly, Michigan restricts Sunday sales to only those counties with a population of less than 130,000. Texas and Utah prohibit car dealerships from operating over consecutive weekend days. In some cases these laws were created or retained with the support of those whom they affected, to allow them a day off each week without fear of their competitors still being open.[Good Question: Why Can't We Buy Alcohol On Sunday?], WCCO-TV, November 20, 2006CanadaThe Lord's Day Act, which since 1906 had prohibited business transactions from taking place on Sundays, was declared unconstitutional in the 1985 case ''R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd.'' Calgary police officers witnessed several transactions at the Big M Drug Mart, all of which occurred on a Sunday. Big M was charged with a violation of the Lord's Day Act. A provincial court ruled that the Lord's Day Act was unconstitutional, but the Crown proceeded to appeal all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada. In a unanimous 6–0 decision, the Lord's Day Act was ruled an infringement of the freedom of conscience and religion defined in section 2(a) of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.A Toronto referendum in 1950 allowed only team sports to be played professionally on Sunday. Theatre performances, movie screenings, and horse racing were not permitted until the 1960s.The Supreme Court later concluded, in R. v. Edwards Books and Art Ltd., [1986] (2 S.C.R. 713) that Ontario's Retail Business Holiday Act, which required some Sunday closings, did not violate the Charter because it did not have a religious purpose. Nonetheless, as of today, virtually all provincial Sunday Closing laws have ceased to exist. Some were struck down by provincial courts, but most were simply abrogated — often due to competitive reasons where out-of-province or foreign merchants were open.ChileIn Chile most services and businesses are closed on both New Year's Day (January 1) and Labor Day (May 1). Alcoholic beverages in Chile are not sold on Sunday mornings, while on election days their sale is prohibited by law during the entire day (starting the Saturday before).Late in 2010, some Congressmen (after the four-day Bicentennial holiday was proved successful) asked for a law that would forbid the opening of supermarkets and department stores on Sundays, however retailers claimed that Sunday shopping made about 20% of their weekly sales, more than other day of the week, thus preventing the law from taking place.Cook Islands, Tonga and NiueIn the Cook Islands, blue laws were the first written legislation, enacted by the London Missionary Society in 1827, with the consent of ''ariki'' (chiefs). In Tonga, the Vava'u Code (1839) was inspired by Methodist missionary teachings, and was a form of blue law. In Niue, certain activities remain forbidden on Sunday, reflecting the country's history of observing Christian Sabbath tradition.DenmarkIn Denmark the closing laws restricting retail trade on Sundays have been abolished with effect from October 1, 2012. From then on retail trade is only restricted on public holidays (New Years Day, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Easter Monday, Day of Prayer, Ascension Day, Whit Sunday, Whit Monday, Christmas Day and Boxing Day) and on Constitution Day, Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve (on New Year's Eve from 3pm only). On these days almost all shops will remain closed. Exempt are bakeries, DIYs, garden centres, gas stations and smaller supermarkets.England and WalesPre-1994Prior to 1994, trading laws forbade sale of certain products on a Sunday; the distinction between those you could and couldn't buy was increasingly seen as arbitrary, and the laws were inadequately enforced and widely flouted. For example, some supermarkets would treat the relatively modest fines arising as a business cost and open nonetheless.Post-1994The proposed Sunday Trading Act 1994 relaxed restrictions on Sunday trading. This produced vocal opposition from bodies such as the Keep Sunday Special campaign, and the Lord's Day Observance Society: on religious grounds, on the grounds that it would increase consumerism, and that it would reduce shop assistants' weekend leisure time.The legislation permits large shops (those with a relevant floor area in excess of 280 square metres) to open for up to six hours on Sunday between the hours of 10am and 6pm. Small shops, those with an area of below 280 square metres, are free to set their own Sunday trading times. Some large shops, such as off-licences, service stations and garages, are exempt from the restrictions.Some very large shops (e.g. department stores) open for longer than 6 hours on a Sunday by allowing customers in to browse 30 minutes prior to allowing them to make a purchase, since the 6 hour restriction only applies to time during which the shop may make sales.Christmas Day and Easter Sunday are non-trading days. This applies even to garden centres, which earlier had been trading over Easter, but not to small shops (those with an area of below 280 square metres).Northern IrelandPrior to 2008, no football was permitted to be played on Sundays by clubs affiliated to the Irish Football Association in Northern Ireland.NorwayIn Norway the sale of alcohol on Sundays and election day is strictly illegal, the sale of alcohol on Saturdays ends at 6pm, while it ends at 8pm on weekdays. Most stores are closed on Sundays.Saudi ArabiaIn Saudi Arabia, all businesses except hospitals are made to close during Islamic prayers, held five times daily.ThailandIn Thailand, stores are banned from selling alcohol between midnight-11am and 2pm-5pm. Within these hours however it is legal to buy a total quantity of at least ten litres of any alcoholic beverages. Alcohol sales are also banned during many holidays, especially those related to Buddhism and to the King of Thailand, and election periods. The ban is sometimes skirted by wrapping newspaper or other covering around beer bottles so as not to openly violate it, especially at venues serving tourists.TurkeyIn Turkey alcohol sales (in addition to entertainment programs) are illegal on election day.United StatesBlue laws in the United StatesMany states prohibit selling alcohol for on and off-premises sales in one form or another on Sundays at some restricted time, under the idea that people should be in church on Sunday morning, or at least not drinking.Another feature of blue laws in the United States restricts the purchase of particular items on Sundays. Some of these laws restrict the ability to buy cars, groceries, office supplies, and housewares among other things. Though most of these laws have been relaxed or repealed in most states, they are still enforced in some other states.Some states prohibit some forms of hunting in various degrees on Sundays. For example, Virginia allows the use of hounds to chase wild game but does not permit hunters to still hunt on Sunday.Blue laws may also prohibit retail activity on days other than Sunday. In Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Maine (which was previously part of Massachusetts), for example, blue laws prohibit most retail stores, including grocery stores, from opening on Thanksgiving and Christmas.["A turkey of a blue law"], ''Boston Globe''. Retrieved November 25, 2006.Bergen County, New Jersey, is the last remaining county that prohibits the sale of clothing, shoes, furniture, home appliances and certain other items on Sundays for secular reasons voted to keep by residents through numerous referendums. Paramus, New Jersey has even stricter limitations than the county itself, and bans any type of employment except necessary items like food, gasoline, entertainment venues, hotels, and any other exempted establishments that do not sell clothing, shoes, furniture, home appliances and other certain items as mentioned.Court casesBeginning in the mid-nineteenth century, religious and ethno-cultural minorities arrested for violating state and local blue laws appealed their convictions to state supreme courts. In ''Specht v. Commonwealth'' (1848), for example, German Seventh Day Baptists in Pennsylvania employed attorney Thaddeus Stevens to challenge the constitutionality of Pennsylvania's Sunday law. As in cases in other states, litigants pointed to the provisions of state constitutions protecting religious liberty and maintained that Sunday laws were a blatant violation. Though typically unsuccessful (most state supreme courts upheld the constitutionality of Sunday laws), these constitutional challenges helped set a pattern by which subsequent moral minorities would seek to protect religious freedom and minority rights.The Supreme Court of the United States held in its landmark case, ''McGowan v. Maryland'' (1961), that Maryland's blue laws violated neither the Free Exercise Clause nor the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. It approved the state's blue law restricting commercial activities on Sunday, noting that while such laws originated to encourage attendance at Christian churches, the contemporary Maryland laws were intended to serve "to provide a uniform day of rest for all citizens" on a secular basis and to promote the secular values of "health, safety, recreation, and general well-being" through a common day of rest. That this day coincides with Christian Sabbath is not a bar to the state's secular goals; it neither reduces its effectiveness for secular purposes nor prevents adherents of other religions from observing their own holy days., Supreme Court of the United States, Decided May 29, 1961. Retrieved August 10, 2007. "The present purpose and effect of most of our Sunday Closing Laws is to provide a uniform day of rest for all citizens; and the fact that this day is Sunday, a day of particular significance for the dominant Christian sects, does not bar the State from achieving its secular goals."There were four landmark Sunday-law cases altogether in 1961. The other three were ''Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc.'', 366 U.S. 617 (1961); ''Braunfeld v. Brown'', 366 U.S. 599 (1961); ''Two Guys from Harrison vs. McGinley'', 366 U.S. 582 (1961)., National Sunday Law Crisis. Retrieved May 21, 2008.In March 2006, Texas judges upheld the state blue law that requires car dealerships to close either Saturday or Sunday each weekend.["'Blue Law' for car sales upheld by Judge"], KVIA, March 22, 2006. Retrieved May 28, 2008. "A Texas judge has upheld an old law that requires car dealerships in the Lone Star state to close one day each weekend. They must now choose to open either Saturday or Sunday."VanuatuIn Vanuatu the sale of alcohol in shops and supermarkets is forbidden from midday Saturday until Monday morning, although it is available at resorts and hotels.See also* ''National Sunday Law''* Desuetude* Dry county* Neo-prohibitionism* Raines law* Religious law* Sunday shopping* Sundown town* Religious coercionReferencesBibliography* Algeo, Matthew (2006). ''Last Team Standing''. Philadelphia: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81472-3* Ruck, Rob; with Patterson, Maggie Jones and Weber, Michael P. (2010). ''Rooney: A Sporting Life''. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2283-0* Volk, Kyle G. (2014). ''Moral Minorities and the Making of American Democracy''. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 019937192X.* Westcott, Rich (2001). ''A Century of Philadelphia Sports''. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-56639-861-9External linksde:Sonntagsruhe