File:Flickr - Official U.S. Navy Imagery - Sailors play board games with children at the Cameron Community Ministries during Rochester Navy Week.jpg|thumb|upright=1.60|The modern American board game ''Monopoly'' is licensed in 103 countries and printed in 37 languages.''Men Playing Board Games'', from The Sougandhika Parinaya Manuscript (1821)A '''board game''' is a tabletop game that involves counters or pieces moved or placed on a pre-marked surface or "board", according to a set of rules. Games can be based on pure strategy, chance (e.g., rolling dice), or a mixture of the two, and usually have a goal that a player aims to achieve. Early board games represented a battle between two armies, and most modern board games are still based on defeating opposing players in terms of counters, winning position, or accrual of points (often expressed as in-game currency).There are many varieties of board games. Their representation of real-life situations can range from having no inherent theme (e.g., checkers), to having a specific theme and narrative (e.g., ''Cluedo''). Rules can range from the very simple (e.g., Tic-tac-toe), to those describing a game universe in great detail (e.g., ''Dungeons ; Dragons'')  although most of the latter are role-playing games where the board is secondary to the game, serving to help visualize the game scenario.The time required to learn to play or master a game varies greatly from game to game. Learning time does not necessarily correlate with the number or complexity of rules; some games having profound strategies (e.g. chess or Go) possess relatively simple rulesets. ;;HistoryAncient board gamesFile:Anonymous-Astana Graves Wei Qi Player.jpg|thumb|upright=1.0|''Woman Playing Go'', Astana Cemetery, Turpan (c. 744)Board games have been played in most cultures and societies throughout history. A number of important historical sites, artifacts, and documents shed light on early board games such as:* Jiroft civilization gameboards* Senet, found in Predynastic and First Dynasty burials of Egypt, c. 3500 BC and 3100 BC respectively; the oldest board game known to have existed, Senet was pictured in a fresco found in Merknera's tomb (3300–2700 BC)* Mehen, also from Predynastic Egypt* Go, originating in China* Liubo, also originating in China* Patolli, originating in Mesoamerica played by the ancient Aztec* Royal Game of Ur, the Royal Tombs of Ur contain this game, among others, dating to Mesopotamia 4,600 years agoJason R. Edwards, ''[Saving Families, One Game at a Time ]''* Buddha games list, the earliest known list of games* Pachisi and Chaupar, of IndiaFile:Maler der Grabkammer der Nefertari 003.jpg|Senet, one of the oldest known board gamesFile:Alfonso LJ 97V.jpg|The game of astronomical tables, from ''Libro de los juegos''File:AMI - Schachbrett.jpg|Knossos, New Palace period 1600–1500 BCBoard game with inlays of ivory, rock crystal and glass paste, covered with gold and silver leaf, on a wooden base (Heraklion Archaeological Museum, Crete)File:Black figure plate with warriors playing a board game Antikensammlung Berlin 1.jpg|Ancient Greek hoplites playing a board game, c. 520 BC, Olympia, GreeceFile:Jiroft scorpion.png|A gameboard found in the Jiroft civilizationEuropeGerman-style board game#HistoryFile:VA23Oct10 171.jpg|French earthenware tray and board game, 1720–50File:Anon-The screene of fortune here behold-Early-Harl5937271-E2 4 240 -p1.tiff|''The screene of fortune here behold'', British fortune-telling game, c. 1650–1750United StatesIn seventeenth and eighteenth century colonial America, the agrarian life of the country left little time for game playing though draughts (checkers), bowling, and card games were not unknown. The Pilgrims and Puritans of New England frowned on game playing and viewed dice as instruments of the devil. When the Governor William Bradford discovered a group of non-Puritans playing stool-ball, pitching the bar, and pursuing other sports in the streets on Christmas Day, 1622, he confiscated their implements, reprimanded them, and told them their devotion for the day should be confined to their homes.In ''Thoughts on Lotteries'' (1826) Thomas Jefferson wrote: Almost all these pursuits of chance [i.e., of human industry] produce something useful to society. But there are some which produce nothing, and endanger the well-being of the individuals engaged in them or of others depending on them. Such are games with cards, dice, billiards, etc. And although the pursuit of them is a matter of natural right, yet society, perceiving the irresistible bent of some of its members to pursue them, and the ruin produced by them to the families depending on these individuals, consider it as a case of insanity, quoad hoc, step in to protect the family and the party himself, as in other cases of insanity, infancy, imbecility, etc., and suppress the pursuit altogether, and the natural right of following it. There are some other games of chance, useful on certain occasions, and injurious only when carried beyond their useful bounds. Such are insurances, lotteries, raffles, etc. These they do not suppress, but take their regulation under their own discretion.;/blockquote;The board game ''Traveller's Tour Through the United States'' and its sister game ''Traveller’s Tour Through Europe'' were published by New York City bookseller F. ; R. Lockwood in 1822 and today claims the distinction of being the first board game published in the United States.fvAs the United States shifted from agrarian to urban living in the nineteenth century, greater leisure time and a rise in income became available to the middle class. The American home, once the center of economic production, became the locus of entertainment, enlightenment, and education under the supervision of mothers. Children were encouraged to play board games that developed literacy skills and provided moral instruction.The earliest board games published in the United States were based upon Christian morality. ''The Mansion of Happiness'' (1843), for example, sent players along a path of virtues and vices that led to the Mansion of Happiness (Heaven)."Jensen"''The Game of Pope or Pagan, or The Siege of the Stronghold of Satan by the Christian Army'' (1844) pitted an image on its board of a Hindu woman committing ''suttee'' against missionaries landing on a foreign shore. The missionaries are cast in white as "the symbol of innocence, temperance, and hope" while the pope and pagan are cast in black, the color of "gloom of error, and...grief at the daily loss of empire".File:District Messenger Boy Box Cover 1886.jpg|thumb|upright=1.0|''Game of the District Messenger Boy'' (1886)Commercially produced board games in the mid-nineteenth century were monochrome prints laboriously hand-colored by teams of low paid young factory women. Advances in paper making and printmaking during the period enabled the commercial production of relatively inexpensive board games. The most significant advance was the development of chromolithography, a technological achievement that made bold, richly colored images available at affordable prices. Games cost as little as US$.25 for a small boxed card game to $3.00 for more elaborate games.American Protestants believed a virtuous life led to success, but the belief was challenged mid-century when Americans embraced materialism and capitalism. The accumulation of material goods was viewed as a divine blessing. In 1860, ''The Checkered Game of Life'' rewarded players for mundane activities such as attending college, marrying, and getting rich. Daily life rather than eternal life became the focus of board games. The game was the first to focus on secular virtues rather than religious virtues,"Jensen"and sold 40,000 copies its first year.''Game of the District Messenger Boy, or Merit Rewarded'', published in 1886 by the New York City firm of McLoughlin Brothers, was one of the first board games based on materialism and capitalism published in the United States. The game is a typical roll-and-move track board game. Players move their tokens along the track at the spin of the arrow toward the goal at track's end. Some spaces on the track will advance the player while others will send him back.In the affluent 1880s, Americans witnessed the publication of Algeresque rags to riches games that permitted players to emulate the capitalist heroes of the age. One of the first such games, ''The Game of the District Messenger Boy'', encouraged the idea that the lowliest messenger boy could ascend the corporate ladder to its topmost rung. Such games insinuated that the accumulation of wealth brought increased social status."Jensen"Competitive capitalistic games culminated in 1935 with ''Monopoly'', the most commercially successful board game in United States history.McLoughlin Brothers published similar games based on the telegraph boy theme including ''Game of the Telegraph Boy, or Merit Rewarded'' (1888). Greg Downey notes in his essay, "Information Networks and Urban Spaces: The Case of the Telegraph Messenger Boy" that families who could afford the deluxe version of the game in its chromolithographed, wood-sided box would not "have sent their sons out for such a rough apprenticeship in the working world."Margaret Hofer described the period of 1880s–1920s as "The Golden Age" of board gaming in America.fvBoard games popularity was boosted, like that of many items, through mass production, which made them cheaper and more easily available to the populace. Through there are no detailed statistics, some scholars suggest that the 20th century saw a decline in the popularity of the hobby."Walker2014"21st centuryFile:Board games with expansions 1900-2014.png|thumb|400px|Board games published by year (1900–2014), as listed on BoardGameGeek. Expansions are marked in red.The late 1990s onwards have seen substantial growth in the reach and market of boardgames. This has been attributed to, among other factors, the Internet, which has made it easier for people to find out about games and to find opponents to play against."Walker2014"Around the year 2000 the board gaming industry began significant growth with companies producing a rising number of new games to be sold to a growing worldwide audience. In the 2010s, a number of publications referred to the board games as having a new Golden Age."board game resurgence"guardian2014octLuck, strategy, and diplomacyMany board games involve both luck and strategy. But an important feature of them is the amount of randomness/luck involved, as opposed to skill. Some games, such as chess, depend almost entirely on player skill. But many children's games are decided purely by luck: for example, ''Candy Land'' and ''Snakes and Ladders'' require no decisions by the players. A player may be hampered by a few poor rolls of the dice in backgammon, ''Monopoly'', ''Risk'', or cribbage, but over many games a skilled player will win more often. While some purists consider luck to be an undesirable component of a game, others counter that elements of luck can make for far more diverse and multifaceted strategies, as concepts such as expected value and risk management must be considered.A second aspect is the game information available to players. Some games (chess being a classic example) are ''perfect information'' games: each player has complete information on the state of the game. In other games, such as ''Tigris and Euphrates'' or ''Stratego'', some information is hidden from players. This makes finding the best move more difficult, and may involve estimating probabilities by the opponents.Another important aspect of some games is diplomacy, that is, players making deals with one another. Two-player games usually do not involve diplomacy (cooperative games being the exception). Thus, negotiation generally features only in games with three or more players. An important facet of ''The Settlers of Catan'', for example, is convincing players to trade with you rather than with opponents. In ''Risk'', two or more players may team up against others. ''Easy'' diplomacy involves convincing other players that someone else is winning and should therefore be teamed up against. ''Advanced'' diplomacy (e.g. in the aptly named game ''Diplomacy'') consists of making elaborate plans together, with the possibility of betrayal.Luck may be introduced into a game by a number of methods. The most common method is the use of dice, generally six-sided. These can decide everything from how many steps a player moves their token, as in ''Monopoly'', to how their forces fare in battle, as in ''Risk'', or which resources a player gains, as in ''The Settlers of Catan''. Other games such as ''Sorry! (game)|Sorry!'' use a deck of special cards that, when shuffled, create randomness. ''Scrabble'' does something similar with randomly picked letters. Other games use spinners, timers of random length, or other sources of randomness. Trivia games have a great deal of randomness based on the questions a player must answer. German-style board games are notable for often having less luck element than many North American board games.Board games and other mediaMany board games are now available as video games, which can include the computer itself as one of several players, or as a sole opponent. Many board games can now be played online against a computer and/or other players. Some websites allow play in real time and immediately show the opponents' moves, while others use email to notify the players after each move. The internet and cheaper home printing has also influenced board games via print-and-play games that may be purchased and printed. Some games use external media such as audio cassettes or DVDs in accompaniment to the game.MarketFile:Nepomuk 280 - Osadníci z Katanu.jpg|thumb|right|upright=1.35|The modern German board game ''The Settlers of Catan'' is printed in 30 languages and sold 15 million by 2009.While the board gaming market is estimated to be smaller than that for video games, it has also experienced significant growth from the late 1990s.guardian2014octA 2012 article in ''The Guardian'' described board games as "making a comeback". Another from 2014 gave an estimate that put the growth of the board game market at "between 25% and 40% annually" since 2010, and described the current time as the "golden era for board games". The rise in board game popularity has been attributed to quality improvement (more elegant mechanics and graphics) as well as increased availability thanks to sales through the Internet.guardian2014octA 1991 estimate for the global board game market was over $1.2 billion. A 2001 estimate for the United States "board games and puzzle" market gave the value of under $400 million, and for United Kingdom, of about £50 million. A 2009 estimate for the Korean market was put at 800 million won, and another estimate for the American board game market for the same year was at about $800 million. A 2011 estimate for the Chinese board game market was at over 10 billion yuan. (Some estimates may split board games from collectible card, miniature and role-playing games; for example another 2014 estimate distinguishing board games from other types of hobby games gave the estimate for US and Canada market at only $75 million, with the total size of what it defined as the hobby game market at over $700 million, with a 2015 estimate suggesting a value of almost $900 million) A 2013 estimate put the size of the German toy market at 2.7 billions euro (out of which, board games and puzzle market is worth about 375 million euro), and Polish markets, at 2 billions and 280 millions złoty|złoties, respectively. Per capita, in 2009 Germany was considered to be the best market, with the highest number of games sold per individual.Research into gamingA dedicated field of research into gaming exists, known as game studies or ludology.While there has been a fair amount of scientific research on the psychology of older board games (e.g., chess, Go, mancala), less has been done on contemporary board games such as ''Monopoly'', ''Scrabble'', and ''Risk''. Much research has been carried out on chess, in part because many tournament players are publicly ranked in national and international lists, which makes it possible to compare their levels of expertise. The works of Adriaan de Groot, William Chase, Herbert A. Simon, and Fernand Gobet have established that knowledge, more than the ability to anticipate moves, plays an essential role in chess-playing.Linearly arranged board games have been shown to improve children's spatial numerical understanding. This is because the game is similar to a number line in that they promote a linear understanding of numbers rather than the innate logarithmic one.Research studies show that board games such as Chutes and Ladders result in children showing significant improvements in aspects of basic number skills such as counting, recognizing numbers, numerical estimation and number comprehension. They also practice fine motor skills each time they grasp a game piece. Playing board games has also been tied to improving children's executive skills.Additionally, board games can be therapeutic. Bruce Halpenny, a games inventor said when interviewed about his game: With crime you deal with every basic human emotion and also have enough elements to combine action with melodrama. The player’s imagination is fired as they plan to rob the train. Because of the gamble they take in the early stage of the game there is a build up of tension, which is immediately released once the train is robbed. Release of tension is therapeutic and useful in our society, because most jobs are boring and repetitive.;/blockquote;Playing games have been suggested as a viable addition to traditional educational curriculum.CategoriesA common division of board games is into European- (also known as German-) and American-style games.fvThere are a number of different categories that board games can be classified into, although considerable overlap exists, and a game may belong in several categories. Listing of board games by type over feature over thirty different categories.fvThe following is a list of some of the most common:2* Abstract strategy games – e.g. chess, checkers, Go, Reversi, tafl games, or modern games such as ''Abalone'', ''Stratego'', ''Hive'', or ''GIPF''* Alignment games – e.g. Renju, Gomoku, Connect6, Nine Men's Morris, or Tic-tac-toe* Auction games – e.g. ''Hoity Toity* Chess variants – traditional variants e.g. shogi, xiangqi, or janggi; modern variants e.g. Chess960, Grand chess, Hexagonal chess, or Alice chess* Configuration games – e.g. Lines of Action, Hexade, or ''Entropy''* Connection games – e.g. TwixT, Hex, or Havannah* Cooperative games – e.g. ''Max the Cat'', ''Caves and Claws'', or ''Pandemic''* Count and capture games – e.g. mancala games* Cross and circle games – e.g. Yut, Ludo, or ''Aggravation''* Deduction games – e.g. ''Mastermind'' or ''Black Box''File:GIPF in Play.jpg|thumb|upright=1.20|The abstract strategy game ''GIPF* Dexterity games – e.g. ''Tumblin' Dice'' or ''Pitch Car''* Economic simulation games – e.g. ''The Business Game'', ''Monopoly'', or ''The Game of Life''* Educational games – e.g. ''Arthur Saves the Planet'', ''Cleopatra and the Society of Architects'', or ''Shakespeare: The Bard Game''* Elimination games – e.g. draughts, Alquerque, Fanorona, Yoté, or Surakarta* Family games – e.g. ''Roll Through the Ages'', ''Birds on a Wire'', or ''For Sale''* Fantasy games – e.g. ''Shadows Over Camelot''* German-style board games or ''Eurogames'' – e.g. ''The Settlers of Catan'', ''Carcassonne'', Decatur ;bull; The Game, Carson City, or ''Puerto Rico''* Guessing games – e.g. ''Pictionary'' or Battleship* Historical simulation games – e.g. ''Through the Ages'' or ''Railways of the World''* Large multiplayer games – e.g. ''Take It Easy'' or ''Swat'' (2010)* Learning/communication non-competitive games – e.g. The Ungame (1972)* Mancala games – e.g. Wari, Oware, or The Glass Bead Game* Multiplayer games – e.g. ''Risk'', ''Monopoly'', or Four-player chess* Musical games – e.g. ''Spontuneous''* Negotiation games – e.g. ''Diplomacy''* Paper-and-pencil games – e.g. Tic-tac-toe or Dots and Boxes* Physical skill games – e.g. ''Camp Granada''* Position games (no captures; win by leaving the opponent unable to move) – e.g. Konane, mū tōrere, or the L game* Race games – e.g. Pachisi, backgammon, Snakes and Ladders, Hyena chase, or ''Worm Up''* Roll-and-move games – e.g. ''Monopoly'' or ''Life''* Share-buying games (games in which players buy stakes in each other's positions) – typically longer economic-management games - ''Acquire'' or ''Panamax''* Single-player puzzle games – e.g. peg solitaire or Sudoku* Spiritual development games (games with no winners or losers) – e.g. ''Transformation Game'' or ''Psyche's Key''* Story telling games – e.g. ''Dixit'' or ''Tales of the Arabian Nights''* Stacking games – e.g. Lasca or ''DVONN''* Territory games – e.g. Go or Reversi* Tile-based games – e.g. ''Carcassonne'', ''Scrabble'', ''Tigris and Euphrates'', or ''Evo''* Train games – e.g. ''Ticket to Ride'', ''Steam'', or 18xx* Trivia games – e.g. ''Trivial Pursuit''* Two-player-only themed games – e.g. ''En Garde'' or ''Dos de Mayo''* Unequal forces (or "hunt") games – e.g. Fox and Geese or Tablut* Wargames – ranging from ''Risk'', ''Diplomacy'', or ''Axis ; Allies'', to ''Attack! (board game)|Attack!'' or ''Conquest of the Empire''* Word games – e.g. ''Scrabble'', ''Boggle'', Anagrams, or ''What's My Word?'' (2010)Common termsGlossaryGlossary of board gamesAlthough many board games have a jargon all their own, there is a generalized terminology to describe concepts applicable to basic game mechanics and attributes common to nearly all board games.See also* BoardGameGeek—a board game community and website database* Going Cardboard—a documentary, including interviews with game designers and game publishers* History of games* Interactive movie—DVD games* List of board games* List of game manufacturers* Mind sport* Snakes and Lattes—a board game caféReferences35emFurther reading35em* Austin, Roland G. "Greek Board Games." ''Antiquity'' 14. September 1940: 257–271****** Fiske, Willard. ''Chess in Iceland and in Icelandic Literature—with historical notes on other table-games''. Florentine Typographical Society, 1905.** Golladay, Sonja Musser,   (PhD diss., University of Arizona, 2007)*  ([version])******** Rollefson, Gary O., "A Neolithic Game Board from Ain Ghazal, Jordan", Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 286. (May 1992), pp.1–5.**** Reprint: Random House Value Publishing, 1994. ISBN 0-517-12955-8External linksBoard games*[International Board Game Studies Association]**[BoardGameGeek]