Robert Young'''Robert "Bob" Young''' is a serial entrepreneur who is best known for founding Red Hat Inc., the open source software company. He is also the owner of the Hamilton Tiger-Cats of the Canadian Football League. He was born in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. He attended Trinity College School in Port Hope, Ontario. He received a Bachelor of Arts from Victoria College at the University of Toronto.CareerPrior to Red Hat, Young built a couple of computer rental and leasing businesses, including founding Vernon Computer Rentals in 1984.  Descendants of Vernon are still operating under that name.  After leaving Vernon, Young founded the ACC Corp Inc. in 1993.Marc Ewing and Young's partnership started in 1994 when ACC acquired the Red Hat trademarks from Ewing. In early 1995, ACC changed its name to Red Hat Software, which has subsequently changed to simply Red Hat, Inc. Young served as Red Hat's CEO until 1999.After leaving Red Hat he founded Lulu.com in 2002, a self-publishing web-site that claims to be the world's fastest-growing provider of print-on-demand books. In 2006, Young established the Lulu Blooker Prize, a book prize for books that began as blogs. He launched the prize partly as a means of promoting Lulu.Young also co-founded ''Linux Journal'' in 1994, and in 2003, he purchased the Hamilton Tiger-Cats, a Canadian Football League franchise.Young focuses his philanthropic efforts to support an increased access to information and advancement of knowledge.  In 1999, he founded The Center for the Public Domain.  Young currently supports Creative Commons, the Public Knowledge Project, the Dictionary of Old English, the Internet Archive, ibiblio, the NCSU eGames,["NCSU eGames official site"] accessed 2012-01-05 and the Bald Head Island Conservancy,["BHIC official site"] accessed 2012-01-05 among others. He is a Visionaries' Circle supporter of the Loran Scholars Foundation.See also* Center for the Public Domain* Red Hat* ''Linux Journal''* Lulu (company)ReferencesBob Young