'''Bombay Sapphire''' is a brand of gin owned by Bacardi  that was first launched in 1987 by IDV.  In 1997 Diageo sold the brand to Bacardi. Its name originates from gin's popularity in India during the British Raj and the sapphire in question is the Star of Bombay on display at the Smithsonian Institution. Bombay Sapphire is marketed in a flat-sided, sapphire-coloured bottle that bears a picture of Queen Victoria on the label."bacardilimited1"The flavouring of the drink comes from a recipe of ten ingredients: almond, lemon peel, liquorice, juniper berries, orris root, angelica, coriander, cassia, cubeb, and grains of paradise. The spirit is triple distilled using a carterhead still, and the alcohol vapours are passed through a mesh/basket containing the ten botanicals, in order to gain flavour and aroma. This gives a lighter, more floral gin rather than the more-common 'punchy' gins that are distilled using a copper pot still. Water from Lake Vyrnwy is added to bring the strength of Bombay Sapphire down to 40.0% (UK, Canada, Australia).In 2011, plans were announced to move the distillation process to a new facility in Laverstoke, Hampshire, including the restoration of the former Portal's paper mill at the proposed site, and the construction of a visitor centre. Planning permission was granted in February 2012, and the centre opened to the public in the autumn of  2014. ''Gintime'' 19 September 2014,Production and bottling of the drink is contracted out by Bacardi to G;J Greenall.VarietiesBacardi also markets '''Bombay Original London Dry Gin''' (or '''Bombay Original Dry'''). Eight botanical ingredients are used in the production of the Original Dry Gin veriety as opposed to the ten in Bombay Sapphire. ''Wine Enthusiast'' preferred Bombay Sapphire.In September 2011, '''Bombay Sapphire East''' was launched in test markets in New York and Las Vegas. This variety has another two botanicals, lemongrass and black peppercorns, in addition to the original ten. It is bottled at 42% and was designed to counteract the sweetness of American tonic water.A Special edition of Bombay Gin was produced in 2015 for the UK Market. It is called '''Bombay Star''' and was named best Gin available to consumers by ''The Independent'' newspaper. It is bottled at 47.5% and is distilled from grain.Design connectionThe brand started a series of design collaborations. Their first step into the design world was a series of advertisements featuring work from currently popular designers. Their works, varying from martini glasses to tiles and cloth patterns, are labelled as “Inspired by Bombay Sapphire”. The campaign featured designers such as Marcel Wanders, Yves Behar, Karim Rashid, Ulla Darni, and Dror Benshetrit and performance artist Jurgen Hahn.From the success of this campaign, the company began a series of events and sponsored locations. The best known is the Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition, held each year, where design students from all over the world can participate by designing their own “inspired” martini cocktail glass. The finalists (one from each participating country) are then invited to the yearly Salone del Mobile, an international design fair in Milano, where the winner is chosen.Bombay Sapphire also endorses glass artists and designers with the Bombay Sapphire Prize, which is awarded every year to an outstanding design which features glass. Bombay Sapphire also showcases the designers' work in the Bombay Sapphire endorsed blue room, which is actually a design exhibition touring the world each year.From 2008 the Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition final will be held at 100% Design in London, UK and the Bombay Sapphire Prize will take place in Milan at the Salone Del Mobile.EvaluationBombay Sapphire has been reviewed by several outside spirit ratings organizations to mixed success.  Recently, it was awarded a score of 92 (on a 100-point scale) from the Beverage Testing Institute.  Ratings aggregator Proof66.com categorizes the Sapphire as a Tier 2 spirit, indicating highly favourable "expert" reviews.Cultural References* Bombay Sapphire was used in the video work ''Victoria Day (Bombay Sapphire)'', 2002 by contemporary artists Marina Roy and Abbas Akhavan.* Long time sports radio personality Jim Rome is known for his love of Bombay Sapphire Gin, which he often refers to as "the Magic Blue."* American hip-hop artist Wiz Khalifa and his 'Taylor Gang' are also known  for their love of Bombay Sapphire dry gin* Former Las Vegas, Nevada Mayor Oscar Goodman is known for his love of Bombay Sapphire Gin, and has served as a spokesman for the brand.* American restaurateur Mario Carlo Tucci of Oscar's Delmonico Restaurant in New York City was the first to import Bombay Dry Gin to Florence, Italy under Mario Carlo Tucci Ltd Firenze. The labels had his name printed on and the advertisements were in Italian. Circa 1960's.* Christian Grey, male protagonist in 50 Shade of Grey mentions his preferences for Bombay Sapphire when he is in Georgia to meet Anna.ReferencesExternal links*[Bombay Sapphire Homepage]**[Bombay Sapphire Designer Glass Competition]*[Bombay Sapphire Prize]*