Bubble and Squeak (album)Bubble and squeak topped with poached egg'''Bubble and squeak''' is a traditional English dish made with the shallow-fried leftover vegetables from a roast dinner. The main ingredients are potato and cabbage, but carrots, peas, Brussels sprouts, or any other leftover vegetables can be added. The chopped vegetables (and cold chopped meat if used) are fried in a pan together with mashed potatoes or crushed roast potatoes until the mixture is well-cooked and brown on the sides. The dish is so named because it makes bubbling and squeaking sounds during the cooking process. It is often served with cold meat from the Sunday roast, and pickles or brown sauce, or as an accompaniment to a full English breakfast.The meat was traditionally added to the bubble and squeak itself, although nowadays it is more commonly made without meat. The earliest known recipe was in Mrs Rundell's ''A New System of Domestic Cookery'' in 1806.Rundell, Maria Eliza Ketelby (1808). Bubble and Squeak. In ''''.  p. 42. Google Book Search. Retrieved on January 6, 2011.The name ''bubble and squeak'' is used primarily in England (for Scotland and Ireland[Scottish Recipes: Rumbledethumps Recipe;;] see 'Similar dishes'), and it may also be understood in parts of some other Commonwealth countries and the United States. Reading Eagle, Jul 17, 1913[Forbes Lifestyle, Wine and Food] Forbes, Nov 17, 2004Bubble and squeak was a popular dish during World War II, as it was an easy way of using leftovers during a period when most foods were subject to rationing. In more recent times, prepared frozen and tinned versions have become available.Similar dishes* Panackelty, from North East England* Rumbledethumps, stovies and clapshot from Scotland* Colcannon, from Ireland* Stoemp from Belgium* Calentado, from Colombia* Biksemad, from Denmark* Bauernfrühstück, from Germany and Austria* Stamppot, from the Netherlands* Roupa Velha (Portuguese for "old clothes"), from Portugal, often made from leftovers from Cozido à Portuguesa* Ropa Vieja (Spanish for "old clothes"), from Spain, often made from leftovers of Cocido* Trinxat, from the La Cerdanya region of Catalonia, northeast Spain and Andorra* Pyttipanna|Pyttipanna, Pyttipanne ; Pyttipannu (from the Swedish "pytt i panna"="small pieces in pan") from Sweden, Norway and Finland* Hash, from the United StatesReferencesFoodExternal links* Bubble and squeakBubble and Squeak