Bursa (disambiguation)}}'''Bursa''' is a large city in Turkey, located in northwestern Anatolia, within the Marmara Region. It is the fourth most populous city in Turkey and one of the most industrialized metropolitan centers in the country. The city is also the administrative center of Bursa Province.Bursa was the first major and second overall capital of the Ottoman State between 1335 and 1363. The city was referred to as  (Ottoman: خداوندگار) (meaning "God's gift") during the Ottoman period, while a more recent nickname is  (meaning "Green Bursa") in reference to the parks and gardens located across its urban fabric, as well as to the vast and richly varied forests of the surrounding region. The ski resort of Uludağ|Mount Uludağ towers over it. The mountain was called the Mysian Olympus by the Romans who lived there before. Bursa has rather orderly urban growth and borders a fertile plain. The mausoleums of the early Ottoman sultans are located in Bursa and the city's main landmarks include numerous edifices built throughout the Ottoman period. Bursa also has thermal baths and several museums, including a museum of archaeology.The shadow play characters Karagöz and Hacivat are based on historic personalities who lived and died in Bursa. Bursa is also home to some of the most famous Turkish dishes such as İskender kebap, specially candied marron glacés, peaches and Turkish Delight. Bursa houses the Uludağ University, and its population can claim one of the highest overall levels of education in Turkey. The historic towns of İznik (Nicaea), Mudanya and Zeytinbağı are all situated in Bursa Province.In 2014, Bursa had a population of 1,800,278, while Bursa Province had 2,787,539 inhabitants."citypopulation.de""rapor.tuik.gov.tr"History of BursaTimeline of Bursa historyThe earliest known settlement at this location was at Ilıpınar Höyüğü BC 5200. The ancient Greek city of Cius, which Philip V of Macedon granted to Prusias I, the King of Bithynia, in 202 BC. Prusias rebuilt the city and renamed it ''Prusa'' (). After 128 years of Bithynian rule, Nicomedes IV, the last King of Bithynia, bequeathed the entire kingdom to the Roman Empire in 74 BC. An early Roman Treasure was found in the vicinity of Bursa in the early 20th century. Composed of a woman's silver toilet articles, it is now in the British Museum.A view of Bursa in the 1890sA view of Bursa in 2013;;Bursa became the first major capital city of the early Ottoman Empire following its capture from the Byzantines in 1326. As a result, the city witnessed a considerable amount of urban growth throughout the 14th century. After conquering Edirne (Adrianople) in East Thrace, the Ottomans turned it into the new capital city in 1363, but Bursa retained its spiritual and commercial importance in the Ottoman Empire."In 1363 the Ottoman capital moved from Bursa to Edirne, although Bursa retained its spiritual and economic importance." [''Ottoman Capital Bursa'']. Official website of Ministry of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey. Retrieved 19 December 2014. The Ottoman sultan Bayezid I built the Bayezid I Mosque|Bayezid Külliyesi (Bayezid I theological complex) in Bursa between 1390 and 1395 and the Ulu Cami (Grand Mosque) between 1396 and 1400. Bursa remained to be the most important administrative and commercial center in the empire until Mehmed II conquered Constantinople in 1453. The population of Bursa was 45,000 in 1487.''The city in the Islamic world'', Volume 1, ed. Salma Khadra Jayyusi, Renata Holod, Attilio Petruccioli, André Raymond, page 362.During the Ottoman period, Bursa continued to be the source of most royal silk products. Aside from the local silk production, the city imported raw silk from Iran, and occasionally from China, and was the main production center for the kaftans, pillows, embroidery and other silk products for the Ottoman palaces until the 17th century.Following the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, Bursa became one of the industrial centers of the country. The economic development of the city was followed by population growth and Bursa became the 4th most populous city in Turkey.The city has traditionally been a pole of attraction, and was a major center for refugees from various ethnic backgrounds who immigrated to Anatolia from the Balkans during the loss of the Ottoman territories in Europe between the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The most recent arrival of Balkan Turks took place in the 1940s until the 1990s, when the communist regime in Bulgaria expelled approximately 150,000 Bulgarian Turks to Turkey.Eminov, Ali, ''Turks and Other Muslim Minorities in Bulgaria'', New York, Routledge, 1997, Hoepken, W., "Modernnisierung und Nationalismus: Sizialgeschichtliche Aspeckte der Bulgarischen Minder hertenpolitik gegennüber den Türken", Schönfeld, R., ed, ''Nationalitätenprobleme in Südosteuropa'', Munich, Oldenbourg, 1997, p. 255-303, Erdinç, Didar, "Bulgaristan'daki Değişim Sürecinde Türk Azınlığın Ekonomik Durumu", ''Türkler'', Ankara, 2002, s.394–400. About one-third of these 150,000 Bulgarian Turkish refugees eventually settled in Bursa.GeographyBursa is settled on the northwestern slopes of Uludağ|Mount Uludağ in the southern Marmara Region. It is the capital city of Bursa Province bordered by the Sea of Marmara and Yalova to the north; İzmit|Kocaeli and Sakarya to the northeast; Bilecik to the east; and Kütahya and Balıkesir to the south.Climate ==Bursa has a borderline Mediterranean/humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa/Cfa) under the Köppen climate classification|Köppen classification since only two summer months have less than in of rainfall, and dry-hot summer temperate climate (Csa) Trewartha classification. The city has hot, humid summers that last from June until September. Winters are cold and damp, also containing the most rainfall. There can be snow on the ground which will last for a week or two.EconomyFile:Bursa 7149.jpg|thumb|Kent Meydanı AVM shopping centerThe glass pyramid entrance of Zafer Plaza AVM shopping centerBursa is the center of the Turkish automotive industry. Factories of motor vehicle producers like Fiat, Renault and Karsan, as well as automotive parts producers like Bosch, Mako, Valeo, Johnson Controls, Delphi have been active in the city for decades. The textile and food industries are equally strong, with Coca-Cola, Pepsi Cola and other beverage brands, as well as fresh and canned food industries being present in the city's organized industrial zones.The top 10 industry corporations in the Bursa province are as follows:* Oyak Renault* Tofaş Fiat* Bosch* Arcelor-Mittal|Borçelik* Sütaş Dairy Products* Bursa Eczacılar Kooperatifi* Prysmian|Türk Prysmian Kablo* Özdilek* Asil Çelik* Componenta DöktaşApart from its large automotive industry, Bursa also produces a substantial amount of dairy products (by ), processed food (by Tat), and beverages (by ).[Uludağ Beverages]Traditionally, Bursa was famous for being the largest center of silk trade in the Byzantine and later the Ottoman empires, during the period of the lucrative Silk Road. The city is still a major center for textiles in Turkey and is home to the Bursa International Textiles and Trade Center (, or BUTTIM). Bursa was also known for its fertile soil and agricultural activities, which have decreased in the recent decades due to the heavy industrialization of the city.Bursa is a major center for tourism. One of the most popular skiing resorts of Turkey is located at Uludağ|Mount Uludağ, just next to the city proper. Bursa's thermal baths have been used for therapeutical purposes since Roman times. Apart from the baths that are operated by hotels, Uludağ University has a physical therapy center which also makes use of thermal water.TransportationBursa has a metro (Bursaray), trams and bus system for inner-city public transport, while taxi cabs are also available. Bursa's Yenişehir Airport is  away from the city center. The citizens of Bursa also prefer Istanbul's airports such as Istanbul Atatürk Airport|Atatürk International Airport and Sabiha Gökçen International Airport for flights to foreign countries, due to Istanbul's proximity to Bursa. There are numerous daily bus and ferry services between the two cities.The  long Bursa Uludağ Gondola (Teleferik) connects Bursa with the ski resort areas  high on the mountain Uludağ.EducationFile:Mimarlık Fakültesi.jpg|thumb|Uludağ UniversityBursa has two public universities and one private university. Uludağ University, founded in 1975, is the oldest institution of higher education in the city. Founded first as the Bursa University then renamed Uludağ University in 1982, the university has a student body of 47,000, one of the largest in Turkey. Bursa Technical University is the second public university of Bursa and was established in 2010, beginning education in the 2011–2012 academic year.The first private university of Bursa is the Bursa Orhangazi University, which started education in the 2012–2013 academic year. Istanbul Commerce University has opened graduate programs in the city in 2013.SportsFile:Bursa Atatürk Stadium.jpg|thumb|left|Bursa Atatürk StadiumThe city has one professional football club,  Bursaspor, which competes in the Turkish Super League, the top-tier of Turkish football. As of December 21, the team plays their home games at '''The Timsah Arena''' stadium (literally meaning Crocodile Arena), which has a sitting capacity of 45,000.  Bursaspor has won its first league title in the 2009–10 Turkish Super League season, becoming the second Anatolian club to ever win the league title after Trabzonspor. Today Bursaspor is considered one of the five biggest football clubs in Turkey along with Galatasaray SK, Fenerbahçe, Beşiktaş, and Trabzonspor.The city had a professional basketball team in the Turkish Basketball League, Tofaş S.K., which was among the most successful teams; until it stopped participating in the league following a decision by the automobile manufacturer Tofaş, its sponsor and parent company.Main sightsUlu Cami (Grand Mosque)Interior of the Ulu Cami (Grand Mosque), showing the fountain (şadırvan) for ritual ablutions.Ulu Cami is the largest mosque in Bursa and a landmark of early Ottoman architecture, which carried many elements from the Seljuk architecture. Ordered by Sultan Bayezid I, the mosque was designed and built by architect Ali Neccar in 1396–1400. It is a large and rectangular building, with a total of twenty domes that are arranged in four rows of five, and are supported by 12 columns. Supposedly the twenty domes were built instead of the twenty separate mosques which Sultan Bayezid I had promised for winning the Battle of Nicopolis in 1396. The mosque has two minarets.Inside the mosque there are 192 monumental wall inscriptions written by the famous calligraphers of that period. There is also a fountain (şadırvan) where worshipers can perform ritual ablutions before prayer; the dome over the şadırvan is capped by a skylight which creates a soft, serene light below; thus playing an important role in the illumination of the large building.The horizontally spacious and dimly lit interior is designed to feel peaceful and contemplative. The subdivisions of space formed by multiple domes and pillars create a sense of privacy and even intimacy. This atmosphere contrasts with the later Ottoman mosques (see for example the works of Suleiman the Magnificent's chief architect Mimar Sinan.) The mosques that were built after the conquest of Constantinople (Istanbul) by the Ottoman Turks in 1453, and influenced by the design of the 6th century Byzantine basilica of Hagia Sophia, had increasingly elevated and large central domes, which create a vertical emphasis that is intended to be more overwhelming; in order to convey the divine power of Allah, the majesty of the Ottoman Sultan, and the governmental authority of the Ottoman State.Places of interestA brief list of places of interest in and around Bursa is presented below. For a longer list, see places of interest in Bursa.Mosques and külliye complexes* Bursa Grand Mosque and* Yeşil Mosque and* Bayezid I Mosque and* Muradiye Mosque and* Emir Sultan Mosque and* Orhan Gazi Mosque and* Hüdavendigar Mosque and* Koca Sinan Paşa Mosque and* İshak Paşa Mosque and* Karacabey Grand Mosque* Karabaş-i Veli Cultural CenterBazaars and caravanserais* Yıldırım Bazaar* Koza Han* Pirinç HanOther historic monuments* Bursa Castle* Irgandı Bridge* Inkaya Sycamore, very big and impressive 600-year-old tree (Platanus Orientalis)Museums* Bursa Archaeological Museum* Bursa City Museum* Bursa Atatürk Museum* Bursa Turkish Architecture Museum* Bursa Islamic Works Museum* Tofaş Museum of Cars and Anatolian Carriages* Armistice of Mudanya Museum* İznik MuseumParks and gardens* Uludağ National Park* Bursa Zoo and Botanical GardenHot springs and thermal baths* Keramet hot spring* Çekirge hot spring* Armutlu hot spring* Oylat hot spring* Gemlik hot spring* Çelik Palas thermal bathBeaches* Armutlu beach* Kumla beach* Kurşunlu beach* Orhangazi beach* Mudanya beachImages from BursaFile:Bursa 7055.jpg|Statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk|Atatürk and the Governorate of BursaFile:Bursa Koza Han (Silk Bazaar) 2.jpg|Koza Han (Silk Bazaar) in BursaFile:Bursa001.jpg|Entrance gate of the Yeşil Mosque|Yeşil Cami (Green Mosque)File:Bursa Turkey 2013 1.jpg|Bursa CastleFile:Muradiye Complex, exterior.jpg|Muradiye Complex|Muradiye Mosque and Külliye in BursaFile:Bursa, Governorate.jpg|Governorate of BursaFile:Mudanya 13.jpg|Ottoman era traditional houses in the Mudanya district of Bursa ProvinceFile:Mudanya 10.jpg|Port of MudanyaFile:Uludag range.JPG|Uludağ|Mt. Uludağ is a popular winter sport destinationFile:Sarıalan14Teleferik.JPG|Bursa aerial tramwayFile:Irgandi_Koprusu.jpg|Irgandı Bridge (1442)File:Bursa Atatürk Müzesi.JPG|Atatürk MuseumFile:Şehreküstü Mosque, Bursa.jpg|Şehreküstü MosqueFile:Bursa Orhan Gazi Mosque.jpg|Orhan Gazi MosqueFile:Emirsultan 1.JPG|Emir Sultan Mosque;/center;Twin towns—Sister citiesList of twin towns and sister cities in TurkeyBursa is twinned with:2*GER Darmstadt, Germany, since 1971BT*BIH Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, since 1972BT*PAK Multan, Pakistan, since 1975BT*FIN Oulu, Finland, since 1978BT*USA Tiffin, Ohio, United States, since 1983BT*TUN Kairouan, Tunisia, since 1987BT*TUR Denizli, Turkey, since 1988BT*Northern Cyprus North Nicosia|Lefkoşa, Northern Cyprus, since 1990BT*PRC Anshan, China, since 1991BT*MKD Bitola, Macedonia, since 1996BT*MDA Ceadîr-Lunga, Moldova, since 1997BT*KAZ Kyzylorda, Kazakhstan, since 1997BT*ALG Muaskar, Algeria, since 1998BT*GER Kulmbach, Germany, since 1998BT*BUL Pleven, Bulgaria, since 1998BT*BUL Plovdiv, Bulgaria, since 1998BT*ALB Tirana, Albania, since 1998BT*SVK Košice, Slovakia, since 2000BT"Košice twinnings";*UKR Vinnytsia, Ukraine, since 2004BT*TUR Van, Turkey, since 2008BT*MAR Rabat, Morocco, since 2010BT*KOR Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea, since 2011BT*UKR Bakhchysarai, Ukraine, since 2010BTSee also* 1855 Bursa earthquake* Yenişehir Airport|Bursa Airport* Bursaray* Roman Catholic Diocese of Prusa (ecclesiastical history)* Complex of Mehmed I* List of people from BursaReferences30emExternal linksBursaBursa**[Bursa Metropolitan Municipality]* [Bursa Oto Kiralama]*[Bursa Governorship]*[Bursa Kultur AS. (Bursa Metropolitan Municipality)]