the country;brFile:United States Navy Band - Chant de Ralliement.ogg;/center;|official_languages = FrenchEnglish|religion = Christianity|ethnic_groups|capital = Yaoundé"CIA"|latd=3 |latm=52 |latNS=N |longd=11 |longm=31 |longEW=E ;;|largest_city = ;;|government_type = Dominant-party presidential republic|leader_title1 = President|leader_name1 = Paul Biya"CIA"|leader_title2 = Prime Minister|leader_name2 = Philémon Yang|legislature = National Assembly|area_rank = 54th ;;|area_magnitude = 1 E11|area_km2 = 475,442|area_sq_mi = 183,569 ;;|percent_water = 0.57 ;;|population_estimate = 22,534,532"CIA"|population_estimate_rank = 56th ;;|population_estimate_year = July 2013|population_census = 17,463,836|population_census_year = 2005|population_density_km2 = 39.7|population_density_sq_mi = 102,8 ;;|population_density_rank = 167th ;;|GDP_PPP_year = 2015|GDP_PPP = $72.109billion|GDP_PPP_per_capita = $3,120"imf2"|GDP_PPP_per_capita_rank =|GDP_nominal_year = 2015|GDP_nominal = $28.524billion"imf2"|GDP_nominal_per_capita = $1,234"imf2"|sovereignty_type = Independence from France|established_event1 = Declared|established_date1 = 1 January 1960|established_event2 =|established_date2 = 1 October 1961|HDI_year = 2014;;|HDI_change = increase;;|HDI = 0.512 ;;|HDI_ref =|HDI_rank = 153rd|Gini_year = 2007|Gini_change = decrease ;;|Gini = 38.9 ;;|Gini_ref =|Gini_rank|currency = Central African CFA franc|currency_code = XAF|country_code|time_zone = WAT|utc_offset = +1|time_zone_DST = not observed|utc_offset_DST = +1|drives_on = Right|calling_code = +237|cctld = .cm|footnote_a = These are the titles as given in the ''Constitution of the Republic of Cameroon'', Article X  ( and  versions). 18 January 1996. The French version of the song is sometimes called ''Chant de Ralliement'', as in Swarovski Orchestra (2004). ''National Anthems of the World''. Koch International Classics; and the English version "O Cameroon, Cradle of Our Forefathers", as in DeLancey and DeLancey 61.|demonym = Cameroonian}}'''Cameroon''' (; Cameroun), officially the '''Republic of Cameroon''' (), is a country in West Africa. It is bordered by Nigeria to the west; Chad to the northeast; the Central African Republic to the east; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of the Congo to the south. Cameroon's coastline lies on the Bight of Bonny, part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean.Cameroon is home to more than 200 different linguistic groups. French and English are the official languages. The country is often referred to as "Africa in miniature" for its geological and cultural diversity. Natural features include beaches, deserts, mountains, rainforests, and savannas. The highest point at almost ft is Mount Cameroon in the Southwest Region of the country, and the largest cities in population-terms are Douala on the Wouri river, its economical capital and main seaport, Yaoundé, its political capital, and Garoua. After independence, the newly united nation joined the Commonwealth of Nations, although the vast majority of its territories had previously been a German colony and, after World War I, a French mandate. The country is well known for its native styles of music, particularly makossa and bikutsi, and for its successful national football team.Early inhabitants of the territory included the Sao civilisation around Lake Chad and the Baka hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest. Portuguese explorers reached the coast in the 15th century and named the area ''Rio dos Camarões'' (''Shrimp River''), which became ''Cameroon'' in English. Fulani soldiers founded the Adamawa Emirate in the north in the 19th century, and various ethnic groups of the west and northwest established powerful chiefdoms and fondoms. Cameroon became a German colony in 1884 known as Kamerun.After World War I, the territory was divided between France and the United Kingdom as League of Nations mandates. The Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC) political party advocated independence, but was outlawed by France in the 1950s. It waged war on French and UPC militant forces until 1971. In 1960, the French-administered part of Cameroon became independent as the Republic of Cameroun under President Ahmadou Ahidjo. The southern part of British Cameroons merged with it in 1961 to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon. The country was renamed the United Republic of Cameroon in 1972 and the Republic of Cameroon in 1984.Cameroon enjoys relatively high political and social stability. This has permitted the development of agriculture, roads, railways, and large petroleum and timber industries. Nevertheless, large numbers of Cameroonians live in poverty as subsistence farmers. Power lies firmly in the hands of the authoritarian president since 1982, Paul Biya, and his Cameroon People's Democratic Movement party. The English-speaking territories of Cameroon have grown increasingly alienated from the government, and politicians from those regions have called for greater decentralization and even secession (for example: the Southern Cameroons National Council) of the former British-governed territories.HistoryHistory of Cameroonleft|Bamum scriptThe territory of present-day Cameroon was first settled during the Neolithic Era. The longest continuous inhabitants are groups such as the Baka (Pygmies). From here, Bantu migrations into eastern, southern, and central Africa are believed to have originated about 2,000 years ago."history"The Sao culture arose around Lake Chad c. AD 500 and gave way to the Kanem and its successor state, the Bornu Empire. Kingdoms, fondoms, and chiefdoms arose in the west.NjungPortuguese sailors reached the coast in 1472. They noted an abundance of the ghost shrimp ''Lepidophthalmus turneranus'' in the Wouri River and named it  (''Shrimp River''), which became ''Cameroon'' in English. Over the following few centuries, European interests regularised trade with the coastal peoples, and Christian missionaries pushed inland.FansoIn the early 19th century, Modibo Adama led Fulani soldiers on a jihad in the north against non-Muslim and partially Muslim peoples and established the Adamawa Emirate. Settled peoples who fled the Fulani caused a major redistribution of population.FansoThe northern part of Cameroon was an important part of the Arab slave trade network."history"The Bamum tribe have a writing system, known as Bamum script or Shu Mom. The script was given to them by Sultan Ibrahim Njoya in 1896, and is taught in Cameroon by the Bamum Scripts and Archives Project."NMAA"The German Empire claimed the territory as the colony of Kamerun in 1884 and began a steady push inland. They initiated projects to improve the colony's infrastructure, relying on a harsh system of forced labour, which was much criticised by the other colonial powers.DeLancey and DeLancey 125.With the defeat of Germany in World War I, Kamerun became a League of Nations mandate territory and was split into French  and British Cameroons in 1919. France integrated the economy of Cameroun with that of FranceDeLancey and DeLancey 5. and improved the infrastructure with capital investments, skilled workers, and modified the system of forced labour."DeLancey 125"The British administered their territory from neighbouring Nigeria. Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a colony". Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons, ending forced labour altogether but angering the local natives, who felt swamped. The League of Nations mandates were converted into United Nations Trusteeships in 1946, and the question of independence became a pressing issue in French Cameroun."DeLancey 5"France outlawed the most radical political party, the Union des Populations du Cameroun (UPC), on 13 July 1955. This prompted a long guerrilla war and the assassination of the party's leader, Ruben Um Nyobé. In the more peaceful British Cameroons, the question was whether to reunify with French Cameroun or join Nigeria.Independence (1960)File:Ahmadou Ahidjo.jpg|thumb|Former president Ahmadou Ahidjo ruled from 1960 until 1982.On 1 January 1960 French Cameroun gained independence from France under President Ahmadou Ahidjo. On 1 October 1961, the formerly British Southern Cameroons united with French Cameroun to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon. Ahidjo used the ongoing war with the UPC to concentrate power in the presidency, continuing with this even after the suppression of the UPC in 1971.DeLancey and DeLancey 6.His political party, the Cameroon National Union (CNU), became the sole legal political party on 1 September 1966 and in 1972, the federal system of government was abolished in favour of a United Republic of Cameroon, headed from Yaoundé. Ahidjo pursued an economic policy of planned liberalism, prioritising cash crops and petroleum development. The government used oil money to create a national cash reserve, pay farmers, and finance major development projects; however, many initiatives failed when Ahidjo appointed unqualified allies to direct them.Paul Biya has ruled the country since 1982Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982 and left power to his constitutional successor, Paul Biya. However, Ahidjo remained in control of the CNU and tried to run the country from behind the scenes until Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning. Biya began his administration by moving toward a more democratic government, but a failed Cameroonian Palace Guard Revolt|coup d'état nudged him toward the leadership style of his predecessor.An economic crisis took effect in the mid-1980s to late 1990s as a result of international economic conditions, drought, falling petroleum prices, and years of corruption, mismanagement, and cronyism. Cameroon turned to foreign aid, cut government spending, and privatised industries. With the reintroduction of multi-party politics in December 1990, the former British Southern Cameroons pressure groups called for greater autonomy, and the Southern Cameroons National Council advocated complete secession as the Republic of Ambazonia.DeLancey and DeLancey 9. In February 2008, Cameroon experienced its worst violence in 15 years when a transport union strike in Douala escalated into violent protests in 31 municipal areas.NkemnguMatthewsIn May 2014, in the wake of the Chibok schoolgirl kidnapping, Presidents Paul Biya of Cameroon and Idriss Déby of Chad announced they are waging war on Boko Haram, and deployed troops to the Nigerian border.Politics and government300px|Unity Palace – Cameroon Presidency.Politics of CameroonThe President of Cameroon is elected and creates policy, administers government agencies, commands the armed forces, negotiates and ratifies treaties, and declares a state of emergency.Neba 250. The president appoints government officials at all levels, from the prime minister (considered the official head of government), to the provincial governors and divisional officers. The president is selected by popular vote every seven years."CIA"The National Assembly makes legislation. The body consists of 180 members who are elected for five-year terms and meet three times per year.msuLaws are passed on a majority vote. Rarely has the assembly changed or blocked legislation proposed by the president."CIA"The 1996 constitution establishes a second house of parliament, the 100-seat Senate, was established in April 2013 and is headed by a senate president who is the constitutional successor in case of untimely vacancy of the presidency."CIA"The government recognises the authority of traditional chiefs, fons, and lamibe to govern at the local level and to resolve disputes as long as such rulings do not conflict with national law."State Dept"Cameroon's legal system is largely based on French civil law with common law influences."CIA"Although nominally independent, the judiciary falls under the authority of the executive's Ministry of Justice."State Dept"The president appoints judges at all levels.msuThe judiciary is officially divided into tribunals, the court of appeal, and the supreme court. The National Assembly elects the members of a nine-member High Court of Justice that judges high-ranking members of government in the event they are charged with high treason or harming national security.Political cultureCameroon is viewed as rife with corruption at all levels of government. In 1997, Cameroon established anti-corruption bureaus in 29 ministries, but only 25% became operational,"IRIN"and in 2012, Transparency International placed Cameroon at number 144 on a list of 176 countries ranked from least to most corrupt.CorruptionOn 18 January 2006, Biya initiated an anti-corruption drive under the direction of the National Anti-Corruption Observatory."IRIN"There are several high corruption risk areas in Cameroon, for instance, customs, public health sector and public procurement.File:Statue d'un chef coutumier à Bana.jpg|thumb|right|upright|A statue of a chief in Bana, West Region.Human rights organisations accuse police and military forces of mistreating and even torturing criminal suspects, ethnic minorities, homosexuals, and political activists."Amnesty""Freedom House""Human Rights Report""EHRC"Prisons are overcrowded with little access to adequate food and medical facilities, "Human Rights Report""EHRC"and prisons run by traditional rulers in the north are charged with holding political opponents at the behest of the government."Freedom House"However, since the first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of police and gendarmes have been prosecuted for improper conduct."Human Rights Report"President Biya's Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM) was the only legal political party until December 1990. Numerous regional political groups have since formed. The primary opposition is the Social Democratic Front (SDF), based largely in the Anglophone region of the country and headed by John Fru Ndi.West 11.Biya and his party have maintained control of the presidency and the National Assembly in national elections, which rivals contend were unfair."DeLancey 9"Human rights organisations allege that the government suppresses the freedoms of opposition groups by preventing demonstrations, disrupting meetings, and arresting opposition leaders and journalists."Amnesty""Freedom House"Freedom House ranks Cameroon as "not free" in terms of political rights and civil liberties.Cameroon is rated at six in both categories on a scale of one to seven, with one being "most free" and seven being "least free". Freedom House. The last parliamentary elections were held on 30 September 2013.KandemehForeign relationsForeign relations of CameroonCameroon is a member of both the Commonwealth of Nations and La Francophonie. Its foreign policy closely follows that of its main ally, France (its former colonial ruler). Cameroon relies heavily on France for its defence,"State Dept"although military spending is high in comparison to other sectors of government. Biya has clashed with the government of Nigeria over possession of the oil rich Bakassi peninsula (however, this was resolved with the Greentree Agreement) and with Gabon's president, El Hadj Omar Bongo, over personal rivalries. "lergai"Administrative divisionsDepartments of CameroonCameroon is divided into 10 regions.The constitution divides Cameroon into 10 semi-autonomous regions, each under the administration of an elected Regional Council.  Each region is headed by a presidentially appointed governor."Neba 250"These leaders are charged with implementing the will of the president, reporting on the general mood and conditions of the regions, administering the civil service, keeping the peace, and overseeing the heads of the smaller administrative units. Governors have broad powers: they may order propaganda in their area and call in the army, gendarmes, and police."Neba 250"All local government officials are employees of the central government's Ministry of Territorial Administration, from which local governments also get most of their budgets.The regions are subdivided into 58 divisions (French ). These are headed by presidentially appointed divisional officers (). The divisions are further split into sub-divisions (''arrondissements''), headed by assistant divisional officers (''sous-prefets''). The districts, administered by district heads (''chefs de district''), are the smallest administrative units.The three northernmost regions are the Far North (), North (''Nord''), and Adamawa (''Adamaoua''). Directly south of them are the Centre (''Centre'') and East (''Est''). The South Province (''Sud'') lies on the Gulf of Guinea and the southern border. Cameroon's western region is split into four smaller regions: the Littoral (''Littoral'') and Southwest (''Sud-Ouest'') regions are on the coast, and the Northwest (''Nord-Ouest'') and West (''Ouest'') regions are in the western grassfields.unhchrEducation and healthHealth in CameroonSchool children in Cameroon.In 2010, the literacy rate of Cameroon was estimated to be 71.3% (male 78.3% and female 64.8%)."CIA"Most children have access to state-run schools that are cheaper than private and religious facilities.Mbaku 15. The educational system is a mixture of British and French precedentsDeLancey and DeLancey 105–6. with most instruction in English or French.Cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in Africa."Mbaku 15"Girls attend school less regularly than boys do because of cultural attitudes, domestic duties, early marriage, pregnancy, and sexual harassment. Although attendance rates are higher in the south,"Mbaku 15"a disproportionate number of teachers are stationed there, leaving northern schools chronically understaffed."Human Rights Report"School attendance in Cameroon is also affected by child labor. Indeed, the U.S. Department of Labor Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor reported that 56% of children aged 5 to 14 were working children and that almost 53% of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school.. Dol.gov. Retrieved on 29 June 2015. In December 2014, a ''List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor'' issued by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs mentioned Cameroon among the countries that resorted to child labor in the production of cocoa.. Dol.gov. Retrieved on 29 June 2015.The quality of health care is generally low.DeLancey and DeLancey 21. In Cameroon, there is only one doctor for every 5,000 people, according to the World Health Organization. Due to financial cuts in the health care system there are few professionals. Doctors and nurses who were trained in Cameroon, emigrate because in Cameroon the payment is bad for too much work. Nurses are unemployed even though their help is needed. Some of them even help out voluntarily so they will not lose their skills. Outside the major cities, facilities are often dirty and poorly equipped.West 64.Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 54.71 years in 2012, among the lowest in the world. Endemic diseases include dengue fever, filariasis, leishmaniasis, malaria, meningitis, schistosomiasis, and sleeping sickness.West 58–60. The HIV/AIDS seroprevalence rate is estimated at 5.4% for those aged 15–49,UNAIDSalthough a strong stigma against the illness keeps the number of reported cases artificially low. "yqheor"Breast ironing, a traditional practice that is prevalent in Cameroon, may affect girls' health.Joe, Randy. (23 June 2006) [Africa | Cameroon girls battle 'breast ironing']. BBC News. Retrieved on 2015-06-29.[BBC World Service – Outlook, Fighting 'Breast Ironing' in Cameroon]. Bbc.co.uk (16 January 2014). Retrieved on 2015-06-29.. Channel4.com (18 April 2014). Retrieved on 2015-06-29.Bawe, Rosaline Ngunshi (24 August 2011) [Breast Ironing : A harmful traditional practice in Cameroon]. Gender Empowerment and Development(GeED) Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced among some populations; according to a 2013 UNICEF report,[UNICEF 2013], p. 27. 1% of women in Cameroon have undergone FGM. Traditional healers remain a popular alternative to Western medicine.LantumGeographyGeography of CameroonFile:Cameroon map of Köppen climate classification.svg|thumb|300px|Cameroon map of Köppen climate classification.File:Rhumsiki Peak.jpg|thumb|Volcanic plugs dot the landscape near Rhumsiki, Far North Region.At sqmi, Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country."Demographic Yearbook"It is slightly larger than the nation of Sweden and comparable in size to Papua New Guinea. The country is located in Central and West Africa on the Bight of Bonny, part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean. Cameroon lies between latitudes 1st parallel north|1° and 13th parallel north|13°N, and longitudes 8th meridian east|8° and 17th meridian east|17°E.Tourist literature describes Cameroon as "Africa in miniature" because it exhibits all major climates and vegetation of the continent: coast, desert, mountains, rainforest, and savanna. The country's neighbours are Nigeria to the west; Chad to the northeast; the Central African Republic to the east; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo to the south."CIA"File:Elephants around tree in Waza, Cameroon.jpg|thumb|300px|Elephants in Waza National Park.Cameroon is divided into five major geographic zones distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative features. The coastal plain extends 0 inland from the Gulf of GuineaFomenskyand has an average elevation of 0. Exceedingly hot and humid with a short dry season, this belt is densely forested and includes some of the wettest places on earth, part of the Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests.ExtremesThe South Cameroon Plateau rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of 0.Neba 16. Equatorial rainforest dominates this region, although its alternation between wet and dry seasons makes it is less humid than the coast. This area is part of the Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion.File:Hills near Ngaoundal.jpg|thumb|Countryside near Ngaoundal in Cameroon's Adamawa Region.An irregular chain of mountains, hills, and plateaus known as the Cameroon range extends from Mount Cameroon on the coast—Cameroon's highest point at 0"Neba 17"—almost to Lake Chad at Cameroon's northern border at 13°05'N. This region has a mild climate, particularly on the Western High Plateau, although rainfall is high. Its soils are among Cameroon's most fertile, especially around volcanic Mount Cameroon.Neba 17. Volcanism here has created crater lakes. On 21 August 1986, one of these, Lake Nyos, belched carbon dioxide and killed between 1,700 and 2,000 people.DeLancey and DeLancey 161 report 1,700 killed; Hudgens and Trillo 1054 say "at least 2,000"; West 10 says "more than 2,000". This area has been delineated by the World Wildlife Fund as the Cameroonian Highlands forests ecoregion.The southern plateau rises northward to the grassy, rugged Adamawa Plateau. This feature stretches from the western mountain area and forms a barrier between the country's north and south. Its average elevation is 0,"Neba 16"and its average temperature ranges from 1 to F with high rainfall between April and October peaking in July and August.GwanfogbeThe northern lowland region extends from the edge of the Adamawa to Lake Chad with an average elevation of 0."Neba 17"Its characteristic vegetation is savanna scrub and grass. This is an arid region with sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.GreenCameroon has four patterns of drainage. In the south, the principal rivers are the Ntem, Nyong, Sanaga, and Wouri. These flow southwestward or westward directly into the Gulf of Guinea. The Dja and Kadéï River|Kadéï drain southeastward into the Congo River. In northern Cameroon, the Benue River|Bénoué River runs north and west and empties into the Niger. The Logone flows northward into Lake Chad, which Cameroon shares with three neighbouring countries.Economy and infrastructureDouala, the economic capital of CameroonA touristic area in LimbeYaoundé Sport palaceEconomy of CameroonCameroon's per-capita GDP (Purchasing power parity) was estimated as US$2,300 in 2008,"CIA"one of the ten highest in sub-Saharan Africa."Musa Biya plan"Major export markets include France, Italy, South Korea, Spain, and the United Kingdom."CIA"Cameroon is aiming to become an emerging country by 2035.Cameroon has had a decade of strong economic performance, with GDP growing at an average of 4% per year. During the 2004–2008 period, public debt was reduced from over 60% of GDP to 10% and official reserves quadrupled to over USD 3billion. Cameroon is part of the Bank of Central African States (of which it is the dominant economy),"Musa Biya plan"the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa (UDEAC) and the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA). Its currency is the CFA franc."CIA"Unemployment was estimated at 30% in 2001, and about a third of the population was living below the international poverty threshold of US$1.25 a day in 2009. Since the late 1980s, Cameroon has been following programmes advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) to reduce poverty, privatise industries, and increase economic growth."State Dept"The government has taken measures to encourage tourism in the country.Cameroon's natural resources are very well suited to agriculture and arboriculture. An estimated 70% of the population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 19.8% of GDP in 2009."CIA"Most agriculture is done at the subsistence scale by local farmers using simple tools. They sell their surplus produce, and some maintain separate fields for commercial use. Urban centres are particularly reliant on peasant agriculture for their foodstuffs. Soils and climate on the coast encourage extensive commercial cultivation of bananas, cocoa, oil palms, rubber, and tea. Inland on the South Cameroon Plateau, cash crops include coffee, sugar, and tobacco. Coffee is a major cash crop in the western highlands, and in the north, natural conditions favour crops such as cotton, groundnuts, and rice. Reliance on agricultural exports makes Cameroon vulnerable to shifts in their prices."CIA"A Fulani herder drives his cattle in northern Cameroon.Livestock are raised throughout the country. Fishing employs 5,000 people and provides over 100,000 tons of seafood each year. Bushmeat, long a staple food for rural Cameroonians, is today a delicacy in the country's urban centres. The commercial bushmeat trade has now surpassed deforestation as the main threat to wildlife in Cameroon.The southern rainforest has vast timber reserves, estimated to cover 37% of Cameroon's total land area.awfHowever, large areas of the forest are difficult to reach. Logging, largely handled by foreign-owned firms,awfprovides the government US$60million a year as of 1998, and laws mandate the safe and sustainable exploitation of timber. Nevertheless, in practice, the industry is one of the least regulated in Cameroon.Factory-based industry accounted for an estimated 29.7% of GDP in 2009."CIA"More than 75% of Cameroon's industrial strength is located in Douala and Bonabéri. Cameroon possesses substantial mineral resources, but these are not extensively mined (see ''Mining in Cameroon'')."State Dept"Petroleum exploitation has fallen since 1986, but this is still a substantial sector such that dips in prices have a strong effect on the economy. Rapids and waterfalls obstruct the southern rivers, but these sites offer opportunities for hydroelectric development and supply most of Cameroon's energy. The Sanaga River powers the largest hydroelectric station, located at Edéa. The rest of Cameroon's energy comes from oil-powered thermal engines. Much of the country remains without reliable power supplies.Transport in Cameroon is often difficult. Except for the several relatively good toll roads which connect major cities (all of them one-lane) roads are poorly maintained and subject to inclement weather, since only 10% of the roadways are tarred."CIA"Roadblocks often serve little other purpose than to allow police and gendarmes to collect bribes from travellers. Road banditry has long hampered transport along the eastern and western borders, and since 2005, the problem has intensified in the east as the Central African Republic has further destabilised."Musa Gunmen"Intercity bus services run by multiple private companies connect all major cities. They are the most popular means of transportation followed by the rail service ''Camrail''. Rail service runs from Kumba in the west to Bélabo in the east and north to Ngaoundéré. International airports are located in Douala and Yaoundé Nsimalen International Airport|Yaoundé, with a third under construction in Maroua. Douala is the country's principal seaport. In the north, the Bénoué River is seasonally navigable from Garoua across into Nigeria.Although press freedoms have improved since the first decade of the 21st century, the press is corrupt and beholden to special interests and political groups."Cameroon – Annual Report 2007". Newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals."Human Rights Report"The major radio and television stations are state-run and other communications, such as land-based telephones and telegraphs, are largely under government control. However, cell phone networks and Internet providers have increased dramatically since the first decade of the 21st centuryMbaku 20–1. and are largely unregulated."Freedom House"Worlddiplomacy.org states that "[President] Paul Biya is one of the longest servings heads of state in the world and as long as he remains in power, Cameroon will continue to steadily progress economically without much surprises".[Cameroon]. Worlddiplomacy.org. Retrieved on 29 June 2015.MilitaryMilitary branchesThe Cameroon Armed Forces, (French: ''Forces Armees Camerounaises'', FAC) as of 2013, consists of the country's army (French: ''L'Armee de Terre''), the country's navy (French: ''Marine Nationale Republique'' (MNR), includes naval infantry), the Cameroonian Air Force (French: ''Armee de l'Air du Cameroun'', AAC), Fire Fighter Corps,  and the Gendarmerie (2013).Males and females that are 18 years of age up to 23 years of age and have graduated high school are eligible for military service. Those that do so are obliged 4 years of service. There is no conscription in Cameroon, but the government makes periodic calls for volunteers."AFRICA :: CAMEROON"DemographicsFile:YaoundePanoramicView.jpeg|left |upright=2.0|thumb|Yaounde Panoramic viewLanguages of Cameroon{| class="wikitable" style="float: right; margin-left: 10px"! colspan="4" style="text-align:center; background:#cfb;"| Population in Cameroon [PDF] pp. 87–89.|-! style="background:#cfb;"| Year! style="background:#cfb;"| Million|-| style="text-align:left;"| 1971 || style="text-align:right;"| 7.0|-| style="text-align:left;"| 1990 || style="text-align:right;"| 12.2|-| style="text-align:left;"| 2009|| style="text-align:right;"| 19.5|-| colspan="2" style="text-align:left;"| Source: OECD/World Bank;|}The population total in Cameroon was 20,030,362 in 2011. The life expectancy is 53.69years (52.89years for males and 54.52years for females).Cameroon's population is almost evenly divided between urban and rural dwellers.West 3. Population density is highest in the large urban centres, the western highlands, and the northeastern plain.Neba 109–11. Douala, Yaoundé, and Garoua are the largest cities. In contrast, the Adamawa Plateau, southeastern Bénoué depression, and most of the South Cameroon Plateau are sparsely populated.According to the Cameroon government website, the fertility rate was 5.0 in 2004.People from the overpopulated western highlands and the underdeveloped north are moving to the coastal plantation zone and urban centres for employment.Neba 105–6. Smaller movements are occurring as workers seek employment in lumber mills and plantations in the south and east. Although the national sex ratio is relatively even, these out-migrants are primarily males, which leads to unbalanced ratios in some regions.Neba 103–4.The homes of the Musgum, in the Far North Region, are made of earth and grass.Both monogamous and polygamous marriage are practiced, and the average Cameroonian family is large and extended. In the north, women tend to the home, and men herd cattle or work as farmers. In the south, women grow the family's food, and men provide meat and grow cash crops. Like most societies, Cameroonian society is male-dominated, and violence and discrimination against women is common."Freedom House""Human Rights Report"Estimates identify anywhere from 230 to 282 different folks and linguistic groups in Cameroon. The Adamawa Plateau broadly bisects these into northern and southern divisions. The northern peoples are Sudanese groups, who live in the central highlands and the northern lowlands, and the Fulani, who are spread throughout northern Cameroon. A small number of Shuwa Arabs live near Lake Chad. Southern Cameroon is inhabited by speakers of Bantu and Semi-Bantu languages. Bantu-speaking groups inhabit the coastal and equatorial zones, while speakers of Semi-Bantu languages live in the Western grassfields. Some 5,000 Gyele and Baka Pygmy peoples roam the southeastern and coastal rainforests or live in small, roadside settlements. Nigerians make up the largest group of foreign nationals.RefugeesRefugees in CameroonIn 2007, Cameroon hosted a total population of refugees and asylum seekers of approximately 97,400. Of these, 49,300 were from the Central African Republic (many driven west by war),RCross41,600 from Chad, and 2,900 from Nigeria. Kidnappings of Cameroonian citizens by Central African bandits have increased since 2005."Musa Gunmen"In the first months of 2014, thousands of refugees fleeing the violence in the Central African Republic arrived in Cameroon.On 4 June 2014, AlertNet reported:Almost 90,000 people have fled to neighbouring Cameroon since December and up to 2,000 a week, mostly women and children, are still crossing the border, the United Nations said."Women and children are arriving in Cameroon in a shocking state, after weeks, sometimes months, on the road, foraging for food," said Ertharin Cousin, executive director of the World Food Programme (WFP).;/blockquote;LanguagesLanguages of CameroonThe European languages introduced during colonialism have created a linguistic divide between the population who live in the Northwest and Southwest regions and the French-speaking remainder of the country. Both English and French are official languages, although French is by far the most understood language (80+%).Nathan, Fernand (ed.) (2010) [''La langue francaise dans le monde en 2010''], ISBN 2098824076.German, the language of the original colonisers, has long since been displaced by French and English. Cameroonian Pidgin English is the lingua franca in the formerly British-administered territories. A mixture of English, French, and Pidgin called FrancAnglais has been gaining popularity in urban centres since the mid-1970s.NibaReligionReligion in CameroonCameroon has a high level of religious freedom and diversity."Human Rights Report"The predominant faith is Christianity, practiced by about two-thirds of the population, while Islam is a significant minority faith, adhered to by about one-fifth. In addition, traditional faiths are practiced by many. Muslims are most concentrated in the north, while Christians are concentrated primarily in the southern and western regions, but practitioners of both faiths can be found throughout the country.IRFRLarge cities have significant populations of both groups.IRFRMuslims in Cameroon are divided into Sunnis (including Wahhabis), Shias, Ahmadis, Sufis, and non-denominational Muslims.Pew Forum on Religious ; Public life. 9 August 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2013People from the North-West and South-West provinces are largely Protestant, and the French-speaking regions of the southern and western regions are largely Catholic.IRFRSouthern ethnic groups predominantly follow Christian or traditional African animist beliefs, or a syncretic combination of the two. People widely believe in witchcraft, and the government outlaws such practices.GeschiereSuspected witches are often subject to mob violence."Human Rights Report"The Islamist jihadist group Boko Haram has been reported as operating in North Cameroon.. ''BBC''. 15 May 2013. retrieved 19 June 2013In the northern regions, the locally dominant Fulani ethnic group is mostly Muslim, but the overall population is fairly evenly divided among Muslims, Christians, and followers of indigenous religious beliefs (called ''Kirdi'' ("pagan") by the Fulani).IRFRThe Bamum ethnic group of the West Region is largely Muslim.IRFRNative traditional religions are practiced in rural areas throughout the country but rarely are practiced publicly in cities, in part because many indigenous religious groups are intrinsically local in character.IRFRCultureMusic and danceCulture of CameroonPublic holidays in CameroonDancers greet visitors to the East Region.Music and dance are an integral part of Cameroonian ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings, and storytelling."West 18"Traditional dances are highly choreographed and separate men and women or forbid participation by one sex altogether. The goals of dances range from pure entertainment to religious devotion.West 18. Traditionally, music is transmitted orally. In a typical performance, a chorus of singers echoes a soloist.Mbaku 189.Musical accompaniment may be as simple as clapping hands and stomping feet, but traditional instruments include bells worn by dancers, clappers, drums and talking drums, flutes, horns, rattles, scrapers, stringed instruments, whistles, and xylophones; the exact combination varies with ethnic group and region. Some performers sing complete songs by themselves, accompanied by a harplike instrument."Mbaku 189"West 18–9.Popular music styles include ambasse bey of the coast, assiko of the Bassa, mangambeu of the Bangangte, and tsamassi of the Bamileke. Nigerian music has influenced Anglophone Cameroonian performers, and Prince Nico Mbarga's highlife hit "Sweet Mother" is the top-selling African record in history.The two most popular styles of music are makossa and bikutsi. Makossa developed in Douala and mixes folk music, highlife, soul, and Congo music. Performers such as Manu Dibango, Francis Bebey, Moni Bilé, and Petit-Pays popularised the style worldwide in the 1970s and 1980s. Bikutsi originated as war music among the Ewondo. Artists such as Anne-Marie Nzié developed it into a popular dance music beginning in the 1940s, and performers such as Mama Ohandja and Les Têtes Brulées popularised it internationally during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.NkoloCuisineCuisine of CameroonFile:Woman weaving baskets near Lake Ossa.jpg|thumb|A woman weaves a basket near Lake Ossa, Littoral Region. Cameroonians practice such handicrafts throughout the country.Cuisine varies by region, but a large, one-course, evening meal is common throughout the country. A typical dish is based on cocoyams, maize, cassava (manioc), millet, plantains, potatoes, rice, or yams, often pounded into dough-like fufu (''cous-cous''). This is served with a sauce, soup, or stew made from greens, groundnuts, palm oil, or other ingredients.West 84–5. Meat and fish are popular but expensive additions.Mbaku 121–2. Dishes are often quite hot, spiced with salt, red pepper, and Maggi.Water, palm wine, and millet beer are the traditional mealtime drinks, although beer, soda, and wine have gained popularity. Silverware is common, but food is traditionally manipulated with the right hand. Breakfast consists of leftovers of bread and fruit with coffee or tea, generally breakfast is made from wheat flour various different foods such as puff-puff (doughnuts), accra banana made from bananas and flour, bean cakes and many more. Snacks are popular, especially in larger towns where they may be bought from street vendors.Local arts and craftsTraditional arts and crafts are practiced throughout the country for commercial, decorative, and religious purposes. Woodcarvings and sculptures are especially common. The high-quality clay of the western highlands is suitable for pottery and ceramics."West 18"Other crafts include basket weaving, beadworking, brass and bronze working, calabash carving and painting, embroidery, and leather working. Traditional housing styles make use of locally available materials and vary from temporary wood-and-leaf shelters of nomadic Mbororo to the rectangular mud-and-thatch homes of southern peoples. Dwellings made from materials such as cement and tin are increasingly common.Mbaku 110–3. Contemporary art is mainly promoted by independent cultural organizations (Doual'art, Africréa) and artist-run initiatives (Art Wash, Atelier Viking, ArtBakery).LiteratureCameroonian LiteratureFile:Cameroon vs Germany 2003.jpg|thumb|300px|Cameroon faces Germany at Zentralstadion in Leipzig, 17 November 2004.Cameroonian literature has concentrated on both European and African themes. Colonial-era writers such as Louis-Marie Pouka and Sankie Maimo were educated by European missionary societies and advocated assimilation into European culture as the means to bring Cameroon into the modern world.Mbaku 80–1 After World War II, writers such as Mongo Beti and Ferdinand Oyono analysed and criticised colonialism and rejected assimilation.FitzpatrickMbaku 77, 83–4VoletFilmShortly after independence, filmmakers such as Jean-Paul Ngassa and Thérèse Sita-Bella explored similar themes.DeLancey and DeLancey 119–20 In the 1960s, Mongo Beti and other writers explored post-colonialism, problems of African development, and the recovery of African identity.Mbaku 85–6. Meanwhile, in the mid-1970s, filmmakers such as Jean-Pierre Dikongué Pipa and Daniel Kamwa dealt with the conflicts between traditional and post-colonial society. Literature and films during the next two decades concentrated more on wholly Cameroonian themes.SportsNational policy strongly advocates sport in all forms. Traditional sports include canoe racing and wrestling, and several hundred runners participate in the  Mount Cameroon Race of Hope each year. Cameroon is one of the few tropical countries to have competed in the Winter Olympics. Sport in Cameroon is dominated by association football (soccer). Amateur football clubs abound, organised along ethnic lines or under corporate sponsors. The Cameroon national football team has been one of the most successful in Africa since its strong showing in the 1990 FIFA World Cup. Cameroon has won four African Cup of Nations titles and the gold medal at the Football at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men's tournament|2000 Olympics.West 92–3, 127.See alsoCameroon* Index of Cameroon-related articles* Outline of Cameroon* Military of Cameroon* Agriculture in CameroonNotesReferences*****Further reading* . Reporters without Borders. Accessed 6 April 2007.* . ''Human Development Report 2006''. United Nations Development Programme. Accessed 6 April 2007.* Fonge, Fuabeh P. (1997). ''Modernization without Development in Africa: Patterns of Change and Continuity in Post-Independence Cameroonian Public Service''. Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press, Inc.* MacDonald, Brian S. (1997). "Case Study 4: Cameroon", ''Military Spending in Developing Countries: How Much Is Too Much?'' McGill-Queen's University Press.* Njeuma, Dorothy L. (no date). "[Country Profiles: Cameroon]". The Boston College Center for International Higher Education. Accessed 11 April 2008.* Sa'ah, Randy Joe (23 June 2006). "[Cameroon girls battle 'breast ironing']". ''BBC News''. Accessed 6 April 2007.* Wight, Susannah, ed. (2006). ''Cameroon''. Spain: MTH Multimedia S.L.* "[World Economic and Financial Surveys]". World Economic Outlook Database, International Monetary Fund. September 2006. Accessed 6 April 2007.External links; Government; General information* Cameroon*** Cameroon;Trade*