Religious law#Christianity'''Canon law''' is the body of laws and regulations made by ecclesiastical authority (Church leadership), for the government of a Christian organization or church and its members. It is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Catholic Church (both Latin Church and Eastern Catholic Churches), the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox churches, and the individual national churches within the Anglican Communion.Boudinhon, Auguste. ["Canon Law." ] The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 9 August 2013 The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was originally a rule adopted by a church council; these canons formed the foundation of canon law.EtymologyGreek ''kanon'' / , Arabic Qanun / قانون, Hebrew kaneh / קנה, "straight"; a rule, code, standard, or measure; the root meaning in all these languages is "reed" (''cf.'' the Romance-language ancestors of the English word "cane").Canons of the ApostlesCanons of the ApostlesThe ''Apostolic Canons'' or ''Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles'' is a collection of ancient ecclesiastical decrees (eighty-five in the Eastern, fifty in the Western Church) concerning the government and discipline of the Early Christian Church, incorporated with the Apostolic Constitutions which are part of the Ante-Nicene FathersIn the fourth century the First Council of Nicaea (325) calls canons the disciplinary measures of the Church: the term canon, κανὠν, means in Greek, a rule. There is a very early distinction between the rules enacted by the Church and the legislative measures taken by the State called ''leges'', Latin for laws.Catholic ChurchCanon law (Catholic Church)In the Catholic Church, canon law is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the Church's hierarchical authorities to regulate its external organization and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the Church., p. 3The Roman Catholic Church canon law also includes the main five rites (groups) of churches which are in full union with the Roman Catholic Church and the Supreme Pontiff:# Alexandrian Rite Churches which include the Coptic Catholic Church and Ethiopian Catholic Church.# West Syrian Rite which includes the Maronite Church, Syriac Catholic Church and the Syro-Malankara Church.# Armenian Rite Church which includes the Armenian Catholic Church.# Byzantine Rite Churches which include the Albanian Byzantine Catholic Church,   Belarusian Greek Catholic Church, Bulgarian Church, Byzantine Church of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro, Greek Church, Hungarian Greek Catholic Church, Italo-Albanian Church, Macedonian Greek Catholic Church, Melkite Church, Romanian Church United with Rome, Greek-Catholic, Russian Church, Ruthenian Church, Slovak Greek Catholic Church and Ukrainian Catholic Church.# East Syrian Rite Churches which includes the Chaldean Church and Syro-Malabar Church.All of these church groups are in full communion with the Pope and subject to the ''Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches''.In the Roman Church, universal positive ecclesiastical laws, based upon either immutable divine and natural law, or changeable circumstantial and merely positive law, derive formal authority and promulgation from the office of pope, who as Supreme Pontiff possesses the totality of legislative, executive, and judicial power in his person.  The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature, but all-encompassing of the human condition.History, sources of law, and codificationsLegal history of the Catholic ChurchImage of pages from the ''Decretum of Burchard of Worms'', the 11th-century book of canon law.The Catholic Church has what is claimed to be the oldest continuously functioning internal legal system in Western Europe, much later than Roman law but predating the evolution of modern European civil law traditions. What began with rules ("canons") adopted by the Apostles at the Council of Jerusalem in the first century has developed into a highly complex legal system encapsulating not just norms of the New Testament, but some elements of the Hebrew (Old Testament), Roman, Visigothic, Saxon, and Celtic legal traditions.The history of Latin canon law can be divided into four periods: the ''jus antiquum'', the ''jus novum'', the ''jus novissimum'' and the ''Code of Canon Law''. In relation to the Code, history can be divided into the ''jus vetus'' (all law before the Code) and the ''jus novum'' (the law of the Code, or ''jus codicis'').Manual113The canon law of the Eastern Catholic Churches, which had developed some different disciplines and practices, underwent its own process of codification, resulting in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches promulgated in 1990 by Pope John Paul II.Catholic canon law as legal systemIt is a fully developed legal system, with all the necessary elements: courts, lawyers, judges, a fully articulated legal code principles of legal interpretation, and coercive penalties, though it lacks civilly-binding force in most secular jurisdictions. The academic degrees in canon law are the J.C.B. (''Juris Canonici Baccalaureatus'', Bachelor of Canon Law, normally taken as a graduate degree), J.C.L. (''Juris Canonici Licentiatus'', Licentiate of Canon Law) and the J.C.D. (''Juris Canonici Doctor'', Doctor of Canon Law). Because of its specialized nature, advanced degrees in civil law or theology are normal prerequisites for the study of canon law.Much of the legislative style was adapted from the Roman Law Code of Justinian. As a result, Roman ecclesiastical courts tend to follow the Roman Law style of continental Europe with some variation, featuring collegiate panels of judges and an investigative form of proceeding, called "inquisitorial", from the Latin "inquirere", to enquire. This is in contrast to the adversarial form of proceeding found in the common law system of English and U.S. law, which features such things as juries and single judges.The institutions and practices of canon law paralleled the legal development of much of Europe, and consequently both modern civil law and common law (legal system) bear the influences of canon law. Edson Luiz Sampel, a Brazilian expert in canon law, says that canon law is contained in the genesis of various institutes of civil law, such as the law in continental Europe and Latin American countries. Sampel explains that canon law has significant influence in contemporary society. Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online Academic Edition. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2013. Web. 9 August 2013.Canonical jurisprudential theory generally follows the principles of Aristotelian-Thomistic legal philosophy.WhiteWhile the term "law" is never explicitly defined in the Code, the Catechism of the Catholic Church cites Aquinas in defining law as "...an ordinance of reason for the common good, promulgated by the one who is in charge of the community" and reformulates it as "...a rule of conduct enacted by competent authority for the sake of the common good."''Catechism of the Catholic Church'', The Moral Law§1951The Code for the Eastern ChurchesThe law of the Eastern Catholic Churches in full union with Rome was in much the same state as that of the Latin or Western Church before 1917; much more diversity in legislation existed in the various Eastern Catholic Churches. Each had its own special law, in which custom still played an important part. In 1929 Pius XI informed the Eastern Churches of his intention to work out a Code for the whole of the Eastern Church. The publication of these Codes for the Eastern Churches regarding the law of persons was made between 1949 through 1958"In 1959, John XXIII, announced for the first time his decision to reform the existing corpus of canonical legislation"but finalized nearly 30 years later.MetzThe first Code of Canon Law, 1917, was mostly for the Roman Rite, with limited application to the Eastern Churches. After the Second Vatican Council, (1962 - 1965), another edition was published specifically for the Roman Rite in 1983. Most recently, 1990, the Vatican produced the ''Code of Canons'' of the Eastern Churches which became the 1st code of ''Eastern Catholic Canon Law''.Orthodox Churches==;;The Greek-speaking Orthodox have collected canons and commentaries upon them in a work known as the ''Pēdálion'' (Greek: Πηδάλιον, "Rudder"), so named because it is meant to "steer" the Church. The Orthodox Christian tradition in general treats its canons more as guidelines than as laws, the bishops adjusting them to cultural and other local circumstances. Some Orthodox canon scholars point out that, had the Ecumenical Councils (which deliberated in Greek) meant for the canons to be used as laws, they would have called them ''nómoi/νόμοι'' (laws) rather than ''kanónes/κανόνες'' (rules), but almost all Orthodox conform to them. The dogmatic decisions of the Councils, though, are to be obeyed rather than to be treated as guidelines, since they are essential for the Church's unity.Anglican CommunionCanon law (Anglican Communion)In the Church of England, the ecclesiastical courts that formerly decided many matters such as disputes relating to marriage, divorce, wills, and defamation, still have jurisdiction of certain church-related matters (e.g. discipline of clergy, alteration of church property, and issues related to churchyards). Their separate status dates back to the 12th century when the Normans split them off from the mixed secular/religious county and local courts used by the Saxons. In contrast to the other courts of England the law used in ecclesiastical matters is at least partially a civil law system, not common law, although heavily governed by parliamentary statutes. Since the Reformation, ecclesiastical courts in England have been royal courts. The teaching of canon law at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge was abrogated by Henry VIII; thereafter practitioners in the ecclesiastical courts were trained in civil law, receiving a Doctor of Civil Law (D.C.L.) degree from Oxford, or a Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from Cambridge. Such lawyers (called "doctors" and "civilians") were centered at "Doctors Commons", a few streets south of St Paul's Cathedral in London, where they monopolized probate, matrimonial, and admiralty cases until their jurisdiction was removed to the common law courts in the mid-19th century.Other churches in the Anglican Communion around the world (e.g., the Episcopal Church in the United States, and the Anglican Church of Canada) still function under their own private systems of canon law.Currently, (2004), there are principles of canon law common to the churches within the Anglican Communion; their existence can be factually established; each province or church contributes through its own legal system to the principles of canon law common within the Communion; these principles have a strong persuasive authority and are fundamental to the self-understanding of each of the churches of the Communion; these principles have a living force, and contain in themselves the possibility of further development; and the existence of these principles both demonstrates unity and promotes unity within the Anglican Communion.Presbyterian and Reformed churchesPresbyterian polityIn Presbyterian and Reformed churches, canon law is known as "practice and procedure" or  "church order", and includes the church's laws respecting its government, discipline, legal practice and worship.Roman canon law had been criticized by the Presbyterians as early as 1572 in the Admonition to Parliament. The protest centered on the standard defense that canon law could be retained so long as it did not contradict the civil law. According to Polly Ha, the Reformed Church Government refuted this claiming that the bishops had been enforcing canon law for 1500 years.LutheranismThe Book of Concord is the historic doctrinal statement of the Lutheran Church, consisting of ten credal documents recognized as authoritative in Lutheranism since the 16th century.Bente, Friedrich., ed. and trans., ''Concordia Triglotta'', (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1921), p. i  However, the Book of Concord is a confessional document (stating orthodox belief) rather than a book of ecclesiastical rules or discipline, like canon law. Each Lutheran national church establishes its own system of church order and discipline, though these are referred to as "canons."The United Methodist ChurchThe Book of Discipline contains the laws, rules, policies and guidelines for The United Methodist Church. Its last edition was published in 2012.See alsoLaw2*Abrogation of Old Covenant laws*Canon law (Church of England)*Canon law (Episcopal Church in the United States)*Canons of the Apostles*Collections of ancient canons*''Decretum Gratiani''*Doctor of Canon Law*Doctor of both laws*Fetha Nagast*''Halakha''*''Ius remonstrandi''*Licentiate of Canon Law*List of canon lawyers*Religious law*Rule according to higher law*Sharia*State religion;;ReferencesFurther reading* Baker, J.H. (2002) ''An Introduction to English Legal History'', 4th ed. London : Butterworths, ISBN 0-406-93053-8* Brundage, James A., ''The Medieval Origins of the Legal Profession: Canonists, Civilians, and Courts'', Chicago : University of Chicago Press, c2008.* Brundage, James A., ''Medieval Canon Law'', London ; New York : Longman, 1995.*  The Episcopal Church (2006) ''[Constitution and Canons], together with the Rules of Order for the Government of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America, otherwise known as The Episcopal Church'', New York : Church Publishing, Inc.* Hartmann, Wilfried and Kenneth Pennington eds. (2008) ''The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX'', Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press.*Hartmann, Wilfried and Kenneth Penningon eds. (2011) ''The History of Byzantine and Eastern Canon Law to 1500'', Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press.* R. C. Mortimer, ''Western Canon Law'', London: A. and C. Black, 1953.* Robinson, O.F.,Fergus, T.D. and Gordon, W.M. (2000) ''European Legal History'', 3rd ed., London : Butterworths, ISBN 0-406-91360-9External linksCanonCatholic*[Codex Iuris Canonici (1983)], original text in Latin (the only official text)*[Code of Canon Law (1983)] but with the 1998 modification of canons 750 and 1371, English translation by the [Canon Law Society of America], on the Vatican website*[Code of Canon Law (1983)], English translation by the Canon Law Society of Great Britain and Ireland, assisted by the Canon Law Society of Australia and New Zealand and the Canadian Canon Law Society*[Codex canonum ecclesiarum orientalium (1990)], original text in Latin*["Code of canons of Oriental Churchs" (1990)], defective English translation*[Codex Iuris Canonici (1917)], original text in Latin*[Catholic Encyclopedia: Canon Law]: outdated, but useful**[1983 Code of Canon Law - Notes, Commentary, Articles, Bibliography]Anglican*["Canons of the Church of England"]*["Ecclesiastical Law Society"]Canon law societies**[Canon Law India]*[Canon Law Society of America]*[Canon Law Society of Australia and New Zealand]*[Canon Law Society of Great Britain ; Ireland]*[Canon Law Society of the Philippines]*[Midwest Canon Law Society (the United States)]*[Sociedade Brasileira de Canonistas]