Carthage (disambiguation)258px|Downfall of the Carthaginian EmpireWon after the First Punic War, lost in the Second Punic War'''Carthage''' (;  '''') was the center or capital city of the ancient Carthaginian civilization that was based in what is today Tunis in Tunisia. The ancient city was destroyed by the Romans, and by tradition it was ploughed over and salted. The ruins were little more than an agricultural village until the middle of the 20th century, when it became a coastal suburb of Tunis. In 1985, the mayors of Rome and Carthage signed a symbolic treaty "officially" ending the conflict between their cities, which had been supposedly extended by the lack of a peace treaty for more than 2,100 years.The city developed from a Phoenician colony of the first millennium before the Common Era into the capital of an ancient empire. The area of Carthage was inhabited by Berbers, who also became the bulk of Carthage's population and constituted a significant part of its army, economy, and administration. Native Berbers and settling Phoenicians in Carthage mixed in different ways, including religion and language, creating the Punic language and culture.The first civilization that developed within the city's sphere of influence is referred to as Carthaginian. The city of Carthage is located on the eastern side of the Lake of Tunis across from the center of Tunis. According to Greek historians, Carthage was founded by Canaanite-speaking Phoenician colonists from Tyre (in modern Lebanon) under the leadership of Queen Elissa or Dido. It became a large and rich city, thus a major power in the Mediterranean. The resulting rivalry with Syracuse, Numidia, and Rome was accompanied by several wars with respective invasions of each other's homeland.Hannibal's invasion of Italy in the Second Punic War culminated in the Carthaginian victory in the Battle of Cannae and led to a serious threat to the continuation of Roman rule over Italy; however, the Romans gained the upper hand by invading Africa and defeating Carthage at the Battle of Zama in 202 BCE. Following the Third Punic War, the city was destroyed by the Romans in 146BC. However, the Romans refounded Carthage, which became the empire's fourth-most important city and the second-most important city in the Latin West. It later became the capital of the short-lived Vandal kingdom. After its conquest by Belisarius, it remained one of the most important cities until the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, when it was destroyed a second time in 698.The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote extensively on Carthaginian politics, and he considered the city to have some of the best governing institutions in the world, along with those of the Greek states of Sparta and Crete., p. 43)3EtymologyNameThe name "Carthage" is an anglicisation of Latin ''Carthago'' (also written ''Karthago''), derived via Greek ''Karkhēdōn'' () and Etruscan ''*Carθaza'', from the Punic '''' {{nowrap|({{script|Phnx|𐤒𐤓𐤕 𐤇𐤃𐤔𐤕}}).}} The name meant "New City" (compare Aramaic , '''', and Hebrew , ''''), implying it was a "new Tyre".[Carthage: new excavations in Mediterranean capital]The usual English adjective for the city, its empire, and its culture is "Carthaginian", but some borrowings from Latin—notably the Punic Wars and the Punic language—employ the Latinate adjective ''wikt:punicus#Latin|pūnicus'', a variant of the word "Phoenician".TopographyCarthage was built on a promontory with sea inlets to the north and the south. The city's location made it master of the Mediterranean's maritime trade. All ships crossing the sea had to pass between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia, where Carthage was built, affording it great power and influence.260pxTwo large, artificial harbors were built within the city, one for harboring the city's massive navy of 220 warships and the other for mercantile trade. A walled tower overlooked both harbors.The city had massive walls,  in length, longer than the walls of comparable cities. Most of the walls were located on the shore, thus could be less impressive, as Carthaginian control of the sea made attack from that direction difficult. The  of wall on the isthmus to the west were truly massive and were never penetrated.The city had a huge necropolis or burial ground, religious area, market places, council house, towers, and a theater, and was divided into four equally sized residential areas with the same layout. Roughly in the middle of the city stood a high citadel called the Byrsa.Carthage was one of the largest cities of the Hellenistic period and was among the largest cities in preindustrial history. Whereas by AD 14, Rome had at least 750,000 inhabitants and in the following century may have reached 1 million, the cities of Alexandria, Antioch, and Carthage numbered only a few hundred thousand or less. According to the not always reliable history of Herodian, Carthage rivaled Alexandria for second place in the Roman empire.HistoryHistory of CarthageLayout of the cityThe historical study of Carthage is difficult because its culture and records were destroyed by the Romans at the end of the Third Punic War, and few primary Carthaginian historical sources survived. While few ancient translations of Punic texts into Greek and Latin remain, inscriptions are found on monuments and buildings discovered in North Africa. Still, the main sources are Greek and Roman historians, including Livy, Polybius, Appian, Cornelius Nepos, Silius Italicus, Plutarch, Cassius Dio, and Herodotus.These writers belonged to peoples in competition and often at war with Carthage. Greek cities contested with Carthage for the Western Mediterranean culminating in the Sicilian Wars and the Pyrrhic War over Sicily and the Romans fought three wars against Carthage.Herodotus, V2. 165–7Polybius, World History: 1.7–1.60 Not surprisingly, their accounts of Carthage are extremely hostile; while a few Greek authors  took a favorable view, these works have been lost.Foundation legends====Queen Elissa (Dido)CarthageAccording to Roman sources, Phoenician colonists from modern-day Lebanon, led by Dido (also known as Queen Elissa), founded Carthage ''circa'' 814 BCE. Queen Elissa (also known as "Alissar") was an exiled princess of the ancient Phoenician city of Tyre. At its peak, the metropolis she founded, Carthage, came to be called the "shining city", ruling 300 other cities around the western Mediterranean Sea and leading the Phoenician world.Elissa's brother, Pygmalion of Tyre, had murdered Elissa's husband, the high priest. Elissa escaped the tyranny of her own country, founding the "new city" of Carthage and subsequently its later dominions. Details of her life are sketchy and confusing, but the following can be deduced from various sources. According to Justin, Princess Elissa was the daughter of King Belus II of Tyre. When he died, the throne was jointly bequeathed to her brother, Pygmalion, and her. She married her uncle Acerbas, also known as Sychaeus, the High Priest of Melqart, a man with both authority and wealth comparable to the king. This led to increased rivalry between the religious elite and the monarchy. Pygmalion was a tyrant, lover of both gold and intrigue, who desired the authority and fortune enjoyed by Acerbas. Pygmalion assassinated Acherbas in the temple and kept the misdeed concealed from his sister for a long time, deceiving her with lies about her husband's death. At the same time, the people of Tyre called for a single sovereign.=Virgil's Aeneid=In the Roman epic of Virgil, the ''Aeneid'', Queen Dido, the Greek name for Elissa, is first introduced as an extremely respected character. In just seven years, since their exodus from Tyre, the Carthaginians have rebuilt a successful kingdom under her rule. Her subjects adore her and present her with a festival of praise. Her character is perceived by Virgil as even more noble when she offers asylum to Aeneas and his men, who have recently escaped from Troy. A spirit in the form of the messenger god, Mercury, sent by Jupiter, reminds Aeneas that his mission is not to stay in Carthage with his new-found love, Dido, but to sail to Italy to found Rome. Virgil ends his legend of Dido with the story that, when Aeneas tells Dido, her heart broken, she orders a pyre to be built where she falls upon Aeneas' sword. As she lay dying, she predicted eternal strife between Aeneas' people and her own: "rise up from my bones, avenging spirit" (4.625, trans. Fitzgerald) she says, an invocation of Hannibal. The details of Virgil's story do not, however, form part of the original legend and are significant mainly as an indication of Rome's attitude towards the city she had destroyed, exemplified by Cato the Elder's much-repeated utterance, "''Carthago delenda est''", "Carthage must be destroyed".Carthaginian republicAncient CarthageCarthaginian-held territory in the early 3rd century BCThe Carthaginian republic was one of the longest-lived and largest states in the ancient Mediterranean. Reports relay several wars with Syracuse and finally, Rome, which eventually resulted in the defeat and destruction of Carthage in the Third Punic War. The Carthaginians were Semitic Phoenician settlers originating in the Mediterranean coast of the Near East. They spoke Canaanite and followed a local variety of the ancient Canaanite religion.ArmyMilitary of ancient CarthageAccording to Polybius, Carthage relied heavily, though not exclusively, on foreign mercenaries,Polybius, Book 6, 52.  especially in overseas warfare. The core of its army was from its own territory in North Africa (ethnic Libyans and Numidians (modern northern Algeria), as well as "Liby-Phoenicians"—i.e., Phoenicians proper). These troops were supported by mercenaries from different ethnic groups and geographic locations across the Mediterranean, who fought in their own national units; Celts and Balearics and Iberians were especially common. Later, after the Barcids conquered Iberia (modern Spain and Portugal), Iberians came to form an even greater part of the Carthaginian forces.Carthage seems to have fielded a formidable cavalry force, especially in its North African homeland; a significant part of it was composed of light Numidian cavalry. Other mounted troops included North African elephants (now extinct), trained for war, which, among other uses, were commonly used for frontal assaults or as anticavalry protection. An army could field up to several hundred of these animals, but on most reported occasions fewer than a hundred were deployed. The riders of these elephants were armed with a spike and hammer to kill the elephants, in case they charged toward their own army. The Carthaginians also fielded troops such as slingers, soldiers armed with straps of cloth used to toss small stones at high speeds.NavyRoman trireme mosaic from Sousse, Sousse Archaeological Museum, Sousse.The navy of Carthage was one of the largest in the Mediterranean, using serial production to maintain high numbers at moderate cost. The sailors and marines of the Carthaginian navy were predominantly recruited from the Phoenician citizenry, unlike the multiethnic allied and mercenary troops of the Carthaginian armies. The navy offered a stable profession and financial security for its sailors. This helped to contribute to the city's political stability, since the unemployed, debt-ridden poor in other cities were frequently inclined to support revolutionary leaders in the hope of improving their own lot.Adrian Goldsworthy– The Fall of Carthage The reputation of her skilled sailors implies that training of oarsmen and coxswains occurred in peacetime, giving their navy a cutting edge in naval matters.The trade of Carthaginian merchantmen was by land across the Sahara and especially by sea throughout the Mediterranean and far into the Atlantic to the tin-rich Cassiterides,Professor Iain Stewart, BBC series "How the Earth Made Us", episode 1: Deep Earth (2010) and also to Northwest Africa. Evidence exists that at least one Punic expedition, that of Hanno, may have sailed along the West African coast to regions south of the Tropic of Cancer.Polybius wrote in the sixth book of his history that the Carthaginians were "more exercised in maritime affairs than any other people." Their navy included some 300 to 350 warships. The Romans, who had little experience in naval warfare prior to the First Punic War, managed to finally defeat Carthage with a combination of reverse-engineered, captured Carthaginian ships, recruitment of experienced Greek sailors from the ranks of its conquered cities, the unorthodox corvus device, and their superior numbers in marines and rowers. In the Third Punic War, Polybius describes a tactical innovation of the Carthaginians, augmenting their few triremes with small vessels that carried hooks (to attack the oars) and fire (to attack the hulls). With this new combination, they were able to stand their ground against the numerically superior Romans for a whole day.FallRuins of CarthageThe fall of Carthage came at the end of the Third Punic War in 146 BC at the Battle of Carthage. Despite initial devastating Roman naval losses and Rome's recovery from the brink of defeat after the terror of a 15-year occupation of much of Italy by Hannibal, the end of the series of wars resulted in the end of Carthaginian power and the complete destruction of the city by Scipio Aemilianus. The Romans pulled the Phoenician warships out into the harbor and burned them before the city, and went from house to house, capturing and enslaving the people. About 50,000 Carthaginians were sold into slavery.[Ancient History] The city was set ablaze and razed to the ground, leaving only ruins and rubble. After the fall of Carthage, Rome annexed the majority of the Carthaginian colonies, including other North African locations such as Volubilis, Lixus, Chellah, and Mogador.[C. Michael Hogan (2007) ''Volubilis'', The Megalithic Portal, ed. by A. Burnham] The legend that the city was sown with salt remains widely accepted despite lacking evidence among ancient historical accounts;B. H. Warmington "The Destruction of Carthage, A Retractatio", ''Classical Philology'' '''83''':4 (1988). pp. 308–10 R.T. Ridley found that the earliest such claim is attributed to B.L. Hallward's chapter in ''Cambridge Ancient History'', published in 1930. Ridley contended that Hallward's claim may have gained traction due to historical evidence of other salted-earth instances such as Abimelech's salting of Shechem in Judges 9:45.R.T. Ridley, "To Be Taken with a Pinch of Salt: The Destruction of Carthage", ''Classical Philology'' '''81''':2 (1986). Many historians have since issued retractions acknowledging Ridley. B.H. Warmington similarly admitted fault in repeating Hallward's error, but posited that the legend precedes 1930 and inspired repetitions of the practice. After Boniface VIII's destruction of Palestrina in 1299, he issued a papal bull referring to the plowing and salting of defeated Carthage. For this reason, Warmington suggested that the symbolic value of the legend is so great and enduring that it mitigates the deficiency of concrete evidence that it happened and is useful to understand how subsequent historical narratives have been framed."Carthage 1988 pp. 308"Starting in the 19th century, various texts claim that the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus Africanus plowed over and sowed the city of Carthage with salt after defeating it in the Third Punic War (146 BC), sacking it, and forcing the survivors into slavery.  However, no ancient sources exist documenting the salting itself. The Carthage story is a later invention, probably modeled on the story of Shechem. The ritual of symbolically drawing a plow over the site of a city is, however, mentioned in ancient sources, though not in reference to Carthage specifically. When Pope Boniface VIII destroyed Palestrina in 1299, he ordered that it be plowed "following the old example of Carthage in Africa", and also salted. "I have run the plough over it, like the ancient Carthage of Africa, and I have had salt sown upon it...."ByrsaByrsaPunic ruins in ByrsaOn top of Byrsa hill, the location of the Roman Forum, a residential area from the last century of existence (early second century BC.) of the Punic city was excavated by the French archaeologist Serge Lancel. The neighborhood, with its houses, shops, and private spaces, is significant for what it reveals about daily life there over 2100 years ago.Serge Lancel and Jean-Paul Morel, "Byrsa. Punic vestiges"; ''To save Carthage. Exploration and conservation of the city Punic, Roman and Byzantine'', Unesco / INAA, 1992, pp. 43–59The remains have been preserved under embankments, the substructures of the later Roman forum, whose foundation piles dot the district. The housing blocks are separated by a grid of straight streets about  wide, with a roadway consisting of clay; ''in situ'' stairs compensate for the slope of the hill. Construction of this type presupposes organization and political will, and has inspired the name of the neighborhood, "Hannibal district", referring to the legendary Punic general or sufet (consul) at the beginning of the second century BCE.The habitat is typical, even stereotypical. The street was often used as a storefront/shopfront; cisterns were installed in basements to collect water for domestic use, and a long corridor on the right side of each residence led to a courtyard containing a sump, around which various other elements may be found. In some places, the ground is covered with mosaics called punica pavement, sometimes using a characteristic red mortar.Roman CarthageRoman CarthageWhen Carthage fell, its nearby rival Utica, a Roman ally, was made capital of the region and replaced Carthage as the leading center of Punic trade and leadership. It had the advantageous position of being situated on the outlet of the Medjerda River, Tunisia's only river that flowed all year long. However, grain cultivation in the Tunisian mountains caused large amounts of silt to erode into the river. This silt accumulated in the harbor until it became useless, and Rome was forced to rebuild Carthage.By 122 BC, Gaius Gracchus founded a short-lived colony, called ''Colonia Iunonia'', after the Latin name for the Punic goddess Tanit, ''Iuno Caelestis''. The purpose was to obtain arable lands for impoverished farmers. The Senate abolished the colony some time later, to undermine Gracchus' power.After this ill-fated attempt, a new city of Carthage was built on the same land by Julius Caesar in the period from 49 to 44 BC, and by the first century, it had grown to be the second-largest city in the western half of the Roman Empire, with a peak population of 500,000. It was the center of the province of Africa, which was a major breadbasket of the Empire. Among its major monuments was an amphitheater.Carthage also became a center of early Christianity (see Carthage (episcopal see)). In the first of a string of rather poorly reported councils at Carthage a few years later, no fewer than 70 bishops attended. Tertullian later broke with the mainstream that was increasingly represented in the West by the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, but a more serious rift among Christians was the Donatist controversy, which Augustine of Hippo spent much time and parchment arguing against. At the 397 Council at Carthage, the biblical canon for the western Church was confirmed.Vandal KingdomVandal KingdomFile:NE 500ad.jpg|thumb|The Vandal Kingdom in 500, centered on CarthageThe political fallout from the deep disaffection of African Christians is supposedly a crucial factor in the ease with which Carthage and the other centers were captured in the fifth century by Genseric, king of the Vandals, a Germanic people who defeated the Roman general Bonifacius and made the city his capital. Genseric was considered a heretic, too, an Arian, and though Arians commonly despised Catholic Christians, a mere promise of toleration might have caused the city's population to accept him. After a failed attempt to recapture the city in the fifth century, the Eastern Roman Empire finally subdued the Vandals in the Vandalic War in 533–534.Thereafter, the city became the seat of the praetorian prefecture of Africa, which was made into an exarchate during the emperor Maurice's reign, as was Ravenna on the Italian Peninsula. These two exarchates were the western bulwarks of the Roman Empire, all that remained of its power in the West.In the early seventh century, the exarch of Carthage overthrew the Roman emperor, Phocas.Islamic conquestMuslim conquest of the MaghrebThe Roman Exarchate of Africa was not able to withstand the seventh-century Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The Umayyad Caliphate under Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan in 686 sent a force led by Zuhayr ibn Qais, who won a battle over the Romans and Berbers led by King Kusaila of the Kingdom of Altava on the plain of Kairouan, but he could not follow that up. In 695, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man captured Carthage and advanced into the Atlas Mountains. An imperial fleet arrived and retook Carthage, but in 698, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man returned and defeated Emperor Tiberios III at the 698 Battle of Carthage. Roman imperial forces withdrew from all of Africa except Ceuta. Roman Carthage was destroyed—its walls torn down, its water supply cut off, and its harbors made unusable. It was replaced by Tunis as the major regional center.The destruction of the Exarchate of Africa marked a permanent end to the Byzantine Empire's influence in the region.Modern suburbModern '''Carthage''' (, ''Qarṭāj''; , ''Kartajen'') is a suburb of Tunis, Tunisia, situated at the site of the ancient capital of the Carthaginian empire.It was little more than an agricultural village for 900 years until the middle of the 20th century; since then, it has grown rapidly as an upscale coastal suburb.  In 2004 it had a population of 15,922 according to the national census, and an estimated population of 21,276 in January 2013.In February 1985, Ugo Vetere, the mayor of Rome, and Chedly Klibi, the mayor of Carthage, signed a symbolic treaty "officially" ending the conflict between their cities, which had been supposedly extended by the lack of a peace treaty for more than 2,100 years.[written by John Lawton]Carthage remains a popular tourist attraction and residential suburb of Tunis. The Carthage Palace (the Tunisian presidential palace) is located in the city.  Modern Carthage, on a peninsula, attracts more wealthy residents.David Lambert, ''Notables des colonies. Une élite de circonstance en Tunisie et au Maroc (1881-1939)'', éd. Presses universitaires de Rennes, Rennes, 2009, pp. 257-258 If Carthage is not the capital, it tends to be the political pole, a « place of emblematic power » according to Sophie Bessis, [Sophie Bessis, « Défendre Carthage, encore et toujours », ''Le Courrier de l'Unesco'', septembre 1999] leaving to Tunis the economic and administrative roles.In the 1950s the Lycée Français de Carthage was established to serve French families in Carthage. In 1961 it was given to the Tunisian government as part of the Independence of Tunisia, so the nearby Collège Maurice Cailloux in La Marsa, previously an annex of the Lycée Français de Carthage, was renamed to the Lycée Français de La Marsa and began serving the ''lycée'' level. It is currently the Lycée Gustave Flaubert (La Marsa)|Lycée Gustave Flaubert."[Qui sommes nous ?]" ([Archive]). Lycée Gustave Flaubert (La Marsa). Retrieved on February 24, 2016.Portrayals in fictionCarthage features in Gustave Flaubert's historical novel ''Salammbô'' (1862). Set around the time of the Mercenary War, it includes a dramatic description of child sacrifice, and the boy Hannibal narrowly avoiding being sacrificed.''The Young Carthaginian'' (1887) by G. A. Henty is a boys' adventure novel told from the perspective of Malchus, a fictional teenage lieutenant of Hannibal during the Second Punic War.In ''The Dead Past'', a science fiction short story by Isaac Asimov, a leading character is an ancient historian who is trying to disprove the allegation the Carthaginians carried out child sacrifice.''The Purple Quest'' by Frank G. Slaughter is about the founding of Carthage.''Die Sterwende Stad'' (The Dying City) is a novel written in Afrikaans by Antonie P. Roux and published in 1956.  It is a fictional account of life in Carthage and included the defeat of Hannibal by Scipio Africanus at the Battle of Zama.  For several years it was prescribed reading for South African  year 11 and 12 high school students studying the Afrikaans language.A duology by John Maddox Roberts, comprising ''Hannibal's Children'' (2002) and ''The Seven Hills'' (2005), is set in an alternate history where Hannibal defeated Rome in the Second Punic War, and Carthage is still a major Mediterranean power in 100 BC.Mary Gentle used an alternate history version of Carthage as a setting in her novels ''Ash: A Secret History'' and ''Ilario, A Story of the First History''. In these books, Carthage is dominated by Germanic tribes, and the premise is that the Visigoths conquered Carthage and set up a huge empire that repelled the Muslim conquest. In these novels, titles such as "lord-amir" and "scientist-magus" indicate a fusion of European and North African cultures, and Arian Christianity is the state religion.See alsoTunisia* Carthage (episcopal see)* Carthaginian currency* History of Tunisia* List of monarchs of Carthage* Punic language* Phoenician language* Phoenicians and wine* Punics* Muslim conquest of the MaghrebReferences30em;Sources;;* .* .;;* .* .* .* .* .* .* .** .External linksCarthageCarthage (ancient city)