CavernFile:Lechuguilla Cave Pearlsian Gulf.jpg|thumb|300px|Lechuguilla Cave, New Mexico, USAA '''cave''' or '''cavern''' is a hollow place in the ground,Whitney, W. D. (1889). "Cave, n.1." def. 1. ''The Century dictionary: An encyclopedic lexicon of the English language'' (Vol. 1, p. 871). New York: The Century Co."Cave" ''Oxford English Dictionary'' Second Edition on CD-ROM (v. 4.0) © Oxford University Press 2009 especially a natural underground space large enough for a human to enter. Caves form naturally by the weathering of rock and often extend deep underground. The word ''cave'' can also refer to much smaller openings such as sea caves, rock shelters, and grottos.Speleology is the science of exploration and study of all aspects of caves and the cave environment. Visiting or exploring caves for recreation may be called ''caving'', ''potholing'', or ''spelunking''.Types and formationThe formation and development of caves is known as ''speleogenesis''. Caves are formed by various geologic processes and can be variable sizes. These may involve a combination of chemical processes, erosion from water, tectonic forces, microorganisms, pressure, and atmospheric influences.It is estimated that the maximum depth of a cave cannot be more than m due to the pressure of overlying rocks.authors И. Кудрявцева, Д. Люри. name Geography. publishing house Аванта+. year 1994. volume 3. page 472. ISBN 5-86529-015-0 For karst caves the maximum depth is determined on the basis of the lower limit of karst forming processes, coinciding with the base of the soluble carbonate rocks. D.A. Timofeev, V.N. Dublyansky, T.Z. Kiknadze, 1991, ''Karst Terminology,'' The Commission Speleology and Karst, Moscow Center of the Russian Geographical Society;;Most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution.Speleothems in Hall of the Mountain King of Ogof Craig a Ffynnon, a solutional cave in South Wales.Solutional caveSolutional cave'''Solutional caves''' are the most frequently occurring caves and such caves form in rock that is soluble, such as limestone, but can also form in other rocks, including chalk, dolomite, marble, salt, and gypsum. Rock is dissolved by natural acid in groundwater that seeps through bedding planes, faults, joints, and comparable features. Over geological epochs cracks expand to become caves and cave systems.The largest and most abundant solutional caves are located in limestone. Limestone dissolves under the action of rainwater and groundwater charged with H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and naturally occurring organic acids. The dissolution process produces a distinctive landform known as ''karst'', characterized by sinkholes and underground drainage. Limestone caves are often adorned with calcium carbonate formations produced through slow precipitation. These include flowstones, stalactites, stalagmites, helictites, soda straws and columns. These secondary mineral deposits in caves are called ''speleothems''.The portions of a solutional cave that are below the water table or the local level of the groundwater will be flooded.Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico and nearby Carlsbad Cavern are now believed to be examples of another type of solutional cave. They were formed by H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas rising from below, where reservoirs of oil give off sulfurous fumes. This gas mixes with ground water and forms H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The acid then dissolves the limestone from below, rather than from above, by acidic water percolating from the surface.Primary cave;;File:hawaiian lava tube.jpg|thumb|300px|Exploring a lava tube in Hawaii.Caves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called '''primary caves'''.Lava tubes are formed through volcanic activity and are the most common primary caves. As lava flows downhill, its surface cools and solidifies. Hot liquid lava continues to flow under that crust, and if most of it flows out, a hollow tube remains. Examples of such caves can be found in the Canary Islands, Jeju-do, the basaltic plains of Eastern Idaho, and other places. Kazumura Cave near Hilo, Hawaii is a remarkably long and deep lava tube; it is .Lava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes. Other caves formed through volcanic activity include rift caves, lava mold caves, open vertical volcanic conduits, and inflationary caves.Sea cave or littoral caveSea caveFile:Painted cave.jpg|300px|right|thumb|Painted Cave, a large sea cave, Santa Cruz Island, CaliforniaSea caves are found along coasts around the world. A special case is littoral caves, which are formed by wave action in zones of weakness in sea cliffs. Often these weaknesses are faults, but they may also be dykes or bedding-plane contacts. Some wave-cut caves are now above sea level because of later uplift. Elsewhere, in places such as Thailand's Phang Nga Bay, solutional caves have been flooded by the sea and are now subject to littoral erosion. Sea caves are generally around  in length, but may exceed .Corrasional cave or erosional caveImage:Sodom Salt Cave 031712.JPG|300px|right|thumb|Salt cave in Mount Sodom, Israel.Corrasional or erosional caves are those that form entirely by erosion by flowing streams carrying rocks and other sediments. These can form in any type of rock, including hard rocks such as granite. Generally there must be some zone of weakness to guide the water, such as a fault or joint. A subtype of the erosional cave is the wind or aeolian cave, carved by wind-born sediments. Many caves formed initially by solutional processes often undergo a subsequent phase of erosional or vadose enlargement where active streams or rivers pass through them.Glacier caveGlacier caveFile:Big Four Glacier Ice cave.jpg|300px|right|thumb|Glacier cave in Big Four Glacier, Big Four Mountain, Washington, ca. 1920Glacier caves are formed by melting ice and flowing water within and under glaciers.  The cavities are influenced by the very slow flow of the ice, which tends to collapse the caves again. Glacier caves are sometimes misidentified as "ice caves", though this latter term is properly reserved for bedrock caves that contain year-round ice formations.Fracture caveFracture caves are formed when layers of more soluble minerals, such as gypsum, dissolve out from between layers of less soluble rock. These rocks fracture and collapse in blocks of stone.Talus caveTalus caves are formed by the openings among large boulders that have fallen down into a random heap, often at the bases of cliffs.  These unstable deposits are called talus or scree, and may be subject to frequent rockfalls and landslides.Anchialine caveAnchialine caveAnchialine caves are caves, usually coastal, containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water). They occur in many parts of the world, and often contain highly specialized and endemic fauna.Physical patterns*''Branchwork caves'' resemble surface dendritic stream patterns; they are made up of passages that join downstream as tributaries. Branchwork caves are the most common of cave patterns and are formed near sinkholes where groundwater recharge occurs. Each passage or branch is fed by a separate recharge source and converges into other higher order branches downstream.Easterbrook, Don, 1999, ''Surface Processes and Landforms [2nd edition]'', New Jersey, Prentice Hall, p. 207*''Angular network caves'' form from intersecting fissures of carbonate rock that have had fractures widened by chemical erosion. These fractures form high, narrow, straight passages that persist in widespread closed loops.Easterbrook*''Anastomotic caves'' largely resemble surface braided streams with their passages separating and then meeting further down drainage. They usually form along one bed or structure, and only rarely cross into upper or lower beds.Easterbrook*''Spongework caves'' are formed when solution cavities are joined by mixing of chemically diverse water. The cavities form a pattern that is three-dimensional and random, resembling a sponge.Easterbrook*''Ramiform caves'' form as irregular large rooms, galleries, and passages. These randomized three-dimensional rooms form from a rising water table that erodes the carbonate rock with hydrogen-sulfide enriched water.Easterbrook*''Pit caves'' (vertical caves, potholes, or simply "pits") consist of a vertical shaft rather than a horizontal cave passage. They may or may not be associated with one of the above structural patterns.Geographic distributionImage:Domica Cave 22.jpg|thumb|280px|Domica Cave in Slovak Karst (Slovakia)Caves are found throughout the world, but only a small portion of them have been explored and documented by cavers. The distribution of documented cave systems is widely skewed toward countries where caving has been popular for many years (such as France, Italy, Australia, the UK, the United States, etc.). As a result, explored caves are found widely in Europe, Asia, North America and Oceania, but are sparse in South America, Africa, and Antarctica.This is a rough generalization, as large expanses of North America and Asia contain no documented caves, whereas areas such as the Madagascar dry deciduous forests and parts of Brazil contain many documented caves. As the world's expanses of soluble bedrock are researched by cavers, the distribution of documented caves is likely to shift. For example, China, despite containing around half the world's exposed limestone—more than —has relatively few documented caves.Records and superlatives*The cave system with the '''greatest total length''' of surveyed passage is Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, USA, at . This record is unlikely to be surpassed in the near future, as the next most extensive known cave is Jewel Cave near Custer, South Dakota, USA, at .[World’s Longest Caves List from The National Speleological Society]*The longest surveyed '''underwater cave''' is Sistema Ox Bel Ha in Yucatán Peninsula|Yucatán, Mexico at ."NSS-GEO2"This record has been exchanged several times with Sistema Sac Actun, currently at .*The '''deepest known cave''' — measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point — is Krubera Cave in Georgia, with a depth of .[World's Deepest Caves List from The National Speleological Society] This was the first cave to be explored to a depth of more than . (The first cave to be descended below  was the famous Gouffre Berger in France.) The Sarma and Illyuzia-Mezhonnogo-Snezhnaya caves in Georgia, (, and  respectively) are the current second- and third-deepest caves.wdeepThe deepest outside Georgia is Lamprechtsofen Vogelschacht Weg Schacht in Austria, which is  deep.wdeep*The '''deepest vertical shaft''' in a cave is  in Vrtoglavica Cave in Slovenia. The second deepest is Velebit caves|Patkov Gušt at  in the Velebit mountain, Croatia.*The '''largest room''' ever discovered is the Sarawak Chamber, in the Gunung Mulu National Park (Miri, Sarawak, Borneo, Malaysia), a sloping, boulder strewn chamber with an area of approximately  and a height of . The nearby Clearwater Cave System is believed to be the world's '''largest cave by volume''', with a calculated volume of .*The '''largest passage''' ever discovered is in the Son Doong Cave in Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park in Quảng Bình Province, Vietnam. It is  in length,  high and wide over most of its length, but over  high and wide for part of its length.World's five longest surveyed cavesList of longest caves# Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, USA"NSS-GEO2"# Sistema Sac Actun/Sistema Dos Ojos, Mexico"NSS-GEO2"# Jewel Cave, South Dakota, USA"NSS-GEO2"# Sistema Ox Bel Ha, Mexico"NSS-GEO2"# Optymistychna Cave, Ukraine"NSS-GEO2"EcologyBiospeleologyFile:townsends in music hall.jpg|thumb|Townsend's big-eared bats in a cave in CaliforniaFile:Proteus anguinus Postojnska Jama Slovenija.jpg|thumb|Olms in a Slovenian caveCave-inhabiting animals are often categorized as troglobites (cave-limited species), troglophiles (species that can live their entire lives in caves, but also occur in other environments), trogloxenes (species that use caves, but cannot complete their life cycle fully in caves) and accidentals (animals not in one of the previous categories). Some authors use separate terminology for aquatic forms (for example, stygobites, stygophiles, and stygoxenes).Of these animals, the troglobites are perhaps the most unusual organisms. Troglobitic species often show a number of characteristics, termed troglomorphic, associated with their adaptation to subterranean life. These characteristics may include a loss of pigment (often resulting in a pale or white coloration), a loss of eyes (or at least of optical functionality), an elongation of appendages, and an enhancement of other senses (such as the ability to sense vibrations in water). Aquatic troglobites (or stygobites), such as the endangered Alabama cave shrimp, live in bodies of water found in caves and get nutrients from detritus washed into their caves and from the feces of bats and other cave inhabitants. Other aquatic troglobites include cave fish, and cave salamanders such as the olm and the Texas blind salamander.Cave insects such as Oligaphorura (formerly Archaphorura) schoetti are troglophiles, reaching  in length. They have extensive distribution and have been studied fairly widely. Most specimens are female, but a male specimen was collected from St Cuthberts Swallet in 1969.Bats, such as the gray bat and Mexican free-tailed bat, are trogloxenes and are often found in caves; they forage outside of the caves. Some species of cave crickets are classified as trogloxenes, because they roost in caves by day and forage above ground at night.Because of the fragile nature of the cave ecosystem, and the fact that cave regions tend to be isolated from one another, caves harbor a number of endangered species, such as the Tooth cave spider, liphistius trapdoor spider, and the gray bat.Caves are visited by many surface-living animals, including humans. These are usually relatively short-lived incursions, due to the lack of light and sustenance.Cave entrances often have typical florae. For instance, in the eastern temperate United States, cave entrances are most frequently (and often densely) populated by the bulblet fern, ''Cystopteris bulbifera''.Archaeological and cultural importanceTaíno petroglyphs in a cave in Puerto RicoThroughout history, primitive peoples have made use of caves. The earliest human fossils found in caves come from a series of caves near Krugersdorp and Mokopane in South Africa. The cave sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai B, Drimolen, Malapa, Cooper's D, Gladysvale, Gondolin and Makapansgat have yielded a range of early human species dating back to between three and one million years ago, including Australopithecus africanus, Australopithecus sediba and Paranthropus robustus. However, it is not generally thought that these early humans were living in the caves, but that they were brought into the caves by carnivores that had killed them.The first early hominid ever found in Africa, the Taung Child in 1924, was also thought for many years to come from a cave, where it had been deposited after being predated on by an eagle. However, this is now debated (Hopley et al., 2013; Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.). Caves do form in the dolomite of the Ghaap Plateau, including the Early, Middle and Later Stone Age site of Wonderwerk Cave; however, the caves that form along the escarpment's edge, like that hypothesised for the Taung Child, are formed within a secondary limestone deposit called tufa. There is numerous evidence for other early human species inhabiting caves from at least one million years ago in different parts of the world, including Homo erectus in China at Zhoukoudian, Homo rhodesiensis in South Africa at the Cave of Hearths (Makapansgat), Homo neandertalensis and Homo heidelbergensis in Europe at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, Homo floresiensis in Indonesia, and the Denisovans in southern Siberia.In southern Africa, early modern humans regularly used sea caves as shelter starting about 180,000 years ago when they learned to exploit the sea for the first time (Marean et al., 2007; Nature). The oldest known site is PP13B at Pinnacle Point. This may have allowed rapid expansion of humans out of Africa and colonization of areas of the world such as Australia by 60-50,000 years ago. Throughout southern Africa, Australia, and Europe, early modern humans used caves and rock shelters as sites for rock art, such as those at Giants Castle. Caves such as the yaodong in China were used for shelter; other caves were used for burials (such as rock-cut tombs), or as religious sites (such as Buddhist caves). Among the known sacred caves are China's Cave of a Thousand Buddhas and the sacred caves of Crete.See also* Cave conservancy* Cave waterfall* Caving organizations* Cenote* List of caves* Pit cave* Speleology* Speleothem* Subterranean river* Underground lakeReferences30emCavestravel information;;