'''Chervil''' (; '''''Anthriscus cerefolium'''''), sometimes called '''garden chervil''' to distinguish it from similar plants also called chervil, or '''French parsley''', is a delicate annual herb related to parsley. It is commonly used to season mild-flavoured dishes and is a constituent of the French herb mixture fines herbes.BiologyA member of the Apiaceae, chervil is native to the Caucasus but was spread by the Romans through most of Europe, where it is now naturalised.The plants grow to , with tripinnate leaves that may be curly. The small white flowers form small umbels,  across. The fruit is about 1cm long, oblong-ovoid with a slender, ridged beak."OBFP"Seed of chervilUses and impact===Culinary artsChervil garnishing a saladChervil is used, particularly in France, to season poultry, seafood, young spring vegetables (such as carrots), soups, and sauces. More delicate than parsley, it has a faint taste of liquorice or aniseed."S;S";Chervil is one of the four traditional French ''fines herbes'', along with tarragon, chives, and parsley, which are essential to French cooking.Julia Child, ''Mastering the Art of French Cooking'' vol. I p 18. Unlike the more pungent, robust herbs, thyme, rosemary, etc., which can take prolonged cooking, the ''fines herbes'' are added at the last minute, to salads, omelettes, and soups.HorticultureAccording to some, slugs are attracted to chervil and the plant is sometimes used to bait them.HealthChervil has had various uses in folk medicine. It was claimed to be useful as a digestive aid, for lowering high blood pressure, and, infused with vinegar, for curing hiccups. Besides its digestive properties, it is used as a mild stimulant."S;S"Chervil has also been implicated in "strimmer dermatitis", or phytophotodermatitis, due to spray from weed trimmers and other forms of contact.  Other plants in the family Apiaceae can have similar effects.CultivationTransplanting chervil can be difficult, due to the long taproot."TBC"It prefers a cool and moist location; otherwise, it rapidly goes to seed (also known as bolting)."TBC"It is usually grown as a cool-season crop, like lettuce, and should be planted in early spring and late fall or in a winter greenhouse. Regular harvesting of leaves also helps to prevent bolting."TBC"If plants bolt despite precautions, the plant can be periodically re-sown throughout the growing season, thus producing fresh plants as older plants bolt and go out of production.Chervil grows to a height of in, and a width of in."TBC"See also*Dill*Parsley*Sweet Cicely*Fines herbesReferencesFurther reading*Howard, Michael. ''Traditional Folk Remedies'' (Century, 1987), p.118.