:''The word Haynau redirects here. For the Austrian general, please see Julius Jacob von Haynau.'''''Chojnów'''  (Haynau) is a small town in Legnica County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in south-western Poland. It is located on the Skora river, a tributary of the Kaczawa at an average altitude of  above sea level. Chojnów is the administrative seat of the rural gmina called Gmina Chojnów, although the town is not part of its territory and forms a separate urban gmina. As of 2006 it had 14,389 inhabitants.Chojnów is located  west of Legnica,  east from Bolesławiec and  north of Złotoryja,  from the A4 motorway. It has railroad connections to Bolesławiec and Legnica.HeraldryCoat of arms of the Chojnów has is a blue escutcheon. On the dial there is a tower with three bastions of white colour. The central tower has two Windows, and one side. On the towers is located on the right side of the Moon and Sun on the left. In the gate of the Silesian Eagle on a yellow background.The Motto of Chojnów is "Friendly City".GeographyChojnów is located in the Central-Western part of the Lower Silesia region. The Skora (Leather) River flows through the town in a westerly direction. The city of Chojnów is  in area, including 41% agricultural land.Chojnów has a connection with the major cities of the country (road and rail) and located  south of Chojnów has the A4 Autostrada. To the South of the town is the surrounding Chojnowska Plain.HistoryThe town is first mentioned in a Latin mediaeval document issued in Wrocław on February 26, 1253, stating, the Silesian Duke Henry III when the town is mentioned under the name Honowo..Georg Korn, „Breslauer Urkundenbuch”, Erster Theil, Breslau, Verlag von Wilhelm Gottlieb Korn 1870,  p14. Possible the name of nearby Hainan Island.  The name in German is still of Haynan..The settlement of ''Haynow'' was mentioned in a 1272 deed. It was already called a ''civitas'' in a 1288 document issued by the Piast duke Henry V of Legnica, and officially received town privileges in 1333.  In 1288, the city is known from documents of the Prince of Legnica Henryk V colon.File:SM Chojnów Dworzec (2) ID 593398.jpg|thumb|Right|Chojnowie Railway StationThe town survived the Hussites, who burned almost the entire town Center and castle, but it quickly helped recover its former glory.  The largest boom Chojnów experienced was in the 16th century, however by the end of that century began to decline due to fires and epidemic, which claimed many victims in 1613AD.From 1618 to 1648 (during the Thirty Years War), there was another outbreak in the city and in 1740 Chojnów was conqored by the Prussians.During the Napoleonic wars there were more epidemics. A railway line was connected in the 19th century. Sewer, Gas lighting a Newspaper and a hospital soon followed as the towns economy improved.The city was not spared in World War II, with 60% of the town being destroyed on February 10, 1945 when Soviet Red Army troops took the town. After World War II and the implementation of the Oder-Neisse line in 1945, the town passed to the Republic of Poland. The German population was expelled from the region.In  March 31, 2011, the city had 14367 inhabitants.Rynek za czasów grodu Chojnów i PRLu uznawany był za plac, nie posiadał wtedy jeszcze skweru pośrodku.Population* 1428 Chojnów had 15 residents* 1633 Chojnów had 500 residents* 1657 Chojnów had 180 residents* 1742 Chojnów had 400 residents* 1788 Chojnów had 20176 residents* 1801 Chojnów had 2314 residents* 1890 Chojnów had 8115 residents* 2005 Chojnów had 14510 residents with 52.1% being female.Chojnów todayChojnów is an industrial and agricultural town. Among local products are: paper, agricultural machinery, chains, metal furniture for hospitals, equipment for the meat industry, beer, wine, leather clothing, and clothing for infants, children and adults. The local government-run weekly newspaper is Gazeta Chojnowska, which has been published since 1992.Among the interesting monuments of Chojnów are the 13th-century castle of the Dukes of Legnica (currently used as a museum), two old churches, the ''Baszta Tkaczy'' (''Weavers' Tower'') and preserved fragments of city walls.The biggest green area in Chojnów is small forest ''Park Piastowski'' (''Piast's Park''), named after Piast dynasty. Wild animals that can be found in the Chojnów area are roe-deer (''sarna'', Capreolus capraea ?), foxes, rabbits and wild domestic animals, especially cats.Every year in the first days of June, the ''Days of Chojnów'' (''Dni Chojnowa'') are celebrated. The Whole-Poland bike race ''Masters'' has been organized yearly in Chojnów for the past few years.GalleryFile:SM Chojnów Zamek(2) ID 593385.jpg|SM Chojnów CastleFile:Chojnów, Ab-047.JPG|Flower beds in ChojnówFile:SM Chojnów Rynek (0) ID 593382.jpg|Market SquareFile:Chojnow 054 jeziorko.jpg|Pond in ChojnówFile:Chojnow 055 most kolejowy.jpg|Railway bridgeFile:Chojnow 019 gimnazjum.jpg|Chojnów Gymnasium SchoolFile:Chojnow 067 duzy kosciol.jpg|St Peter and Paul ChurchFile:SM Chojnów kościół Niepokalanego Poczęcia NMP (5) ID 593383.jpg|Immaculate Conception ChurchCultureMiejski Dom KulturyChojnów has a Municipal sports and recreation center formed in 2008 holding various events, festivals, reviews, exhibitions, competitions,The regional Museum housed in the old Piast era castle. The collections include tiles, relics, and the castle garden.Next to the Museum there is a municipal library.In śródmiejskim Park, near the Town Hall is the amphitheatre.* The ''Gazeta Chojnowska'' is a newspaper published biweekly.  Editions have a run of 900 copies and it is one of the oldest newspapers in Poland issued without interruption.* The ''Chojnów'' is the official newspaper of Chojnów with copy run of  750 copies.EducationIn  Chojnów, there are two kindergartens, two elementary schools and two middle schools.* Mary Konopnickiej is the smallest elementary school in Chojnów, and is located in the northern part of the city, close to the train station and founded in 1962.* Janusz Korczak is the largest primary school in Chojnów in the southern part of the town.*Middle School No. (Pope John Paul II), it is situated in the north-western part of the city next to the "Small Church".*Gimnazjum nr 2 im. Nicolaus Copernicus is the largest high school in Chojnów.* Liceum Ogólnokształcące im. Nicolaus CopernicusReligionChojnów is in the Catholic deanery of Chojnów and has two parishes, Immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary and also the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul. Both parishes have active congregations.There are also two Congregations of Jehovah's witnesses.[JW website in Poland].Notable people*Johann Wilhelm Ritter, chemist and physicist, born December 16, 1776 in nearby Samitz, died January 23, 1810 in Munich*Georg Michaelis, politician, former Minister President of Prussia, born September 8, 1857, died July 24, 1936 in Bad Saarow*Horst Mahler, lawyer, former Red Army Faction militant, now Neo-Nazi activist, born January 23, 1936* Radosław Kałużny, Polish footballer,* Adam Adamski, Polish bodybuilder and a model.* Mieczysław Kasprzak (born 1949), starost of Legnica.* Bogusław Bidziński (born 1973), opera singerInternational relationsList of twin towns and sister cities in PolandTwin towns — sister citiesChojnów is twinned with:*GER Egelsbach, Germany*FRA Commentry, FranceReferencesExternal links*  [City hall homepage]**  [Chojnow Online]*  [E-info about Chojnow]*  [Chojnow social news portal]*