Christmas DayChristmas traditions;;'''Christmas''' or '''Christmas Day''' (, meaning "Christ's Mass") is an annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus Christ,, ''Merriam-Webster''. Retrieved 2008-10-06.[Archived] 2009-10-31.Martindale, Cyril Charles.["Christmas"]. ''The Catholic Encyclopedia''. Vol. 3. New York: Robert Appleton Company,  1908. observed most commonly on December 25"Jan7"Several branches of Eastern Christianity that use the Julian calendar also celebrate on December 25 according to that calendar, which is now January 7 on the Gregorian calendar. Armenian Churches observed the nativity on January 6 even before the Gregorian calendar originated. Most Armenian Christians use the Gregorian calendar, still celebrating Christmas Day on January 6. Some Armenian churches use the Julian calendar, thus celebrating Christmas Day on January 19 on the Gregorian calendar, with January 18 being Christmas Eve.4Datesas a religious and cultural celebration among billions of people around the world."NonXiansUSA"A feast central to the Christian liturgical year, it is prepared for by the season of Advent or the Nativity Fast and initiates the season of Christmastide, which historically in the West lasts twelve days and culminates on Twelfth Night; in some traditions, Christmastide includes an Octave. Christmas Day is a public holiday in many of the world's nations, – ''Government of Canada''. Retrieved November 27, 2009.[2009 Federal Holidays] – ''U.S. Office of Personnel Management''. Retrieved November 27, 2009.[Bank holidays and British Summer time] – ''HM Government''. Retrieved November 27, 2009. is celebrated culturally by a large number of non-Christian people,"nonXians"– ''Daily Mail''. December 23, 2008. Retrieved December 20, 2010. – ''Sioux City Journal''. Retrieved November 18, 2009. and is an integral part of the holiday season, while some Christian groups reject the celebration. In several countries, celebrating Christmas Eve on December 24 has the main focus rather than December 25, with gift-giving and sharing a traditional meal with the family.While the month and date of Jesus' birth are unknown, by the early-to-mid 4th century, the Western Christian Church had placed Christmas on December 25, Sourcebook for Sundays, Seasons, and Weekdays 2011: The Almanac for Pastoral Liturgy by Corinna Laughlin, Michael R. Prendergast, Robert C. Rabe, Corinna Laughlin, Jill Maria Murdy, Therese Brown, Mary Patricia Storms, Ann E. Degenhard, Jill Maria Murdy, Ann E. Degenhard, Therese Brown, Robert C. Rabe, Mary Patricia Storms, Michael R. Prendergast – LiturgyTrainingPublications, March 26, 2010 – page 29 a date later adopted in the East.[The Chronography of 354 AD. Part 12: Commemorations of the Martyrs] – ''The Tertullian Project''. 2006. Retrieved November 24, 2011.Roll, Susan K., '''', (Peeters Publishers, 1995), p.133. Today, most Christians celebrate Christmas on the date of December 25 in the Gregorian calendar, which is also the calendar in near-universal use in the secular world. However, some Eastern churches celebrate Christmas on the December 25 of the older Julian calendar, which currently corresponds to January 7 in the Gregorian calendar, the day after the Western Christian Church celebrates the Epiphany. This is not a disagreement over the date of Christmas as such, but rather a disagreement over which calendar should be used to determine the day that is December 25. The date of Christmas may have initially been chosen to correspond with the day exactly nine months after the day on which early Christians believed that Jesus was conceived, or with one or more ancient polytheistic festivals that occurred near southern solstice (i.e., the Roman winter solstice); a further solar connection has been suggested because of a biblical verse identifying Jesus as the "Sun of righteousness"."bib-arch.org"Newton, Isaac, '''' (1733). Ch. XI. A sun connection is possible because Christians consider Jesus to be the "Sun of righteousness" prophesied in Malachi 4:2."[Christmas]", ''Encarta''. [Archived] 2009-10-31."Touchstone"The celebratory customs associated in various countries with Christmas have a mix of pre-Christian, Christian, and secular themes and origins. Popular modern customs of the holiday include gift giving, completing an Advent calendar or Advent wreath, Christmas music and caroling, lighting a Christingle, an exchange of Christmas cards, church services, a special meal, and the display of various Christmas decorations, including Christmas trees, Christmas lights, nativity scenes, garlands, wreaths, mistletoe, and holly. In addition, several closely related and often interchangeable figures, known as Santa Claus, Father Christmas, Saint Nicholas, and Christkind, are associated with bringing gifts to children during the Christmas season and have their own body of traditions and lore.["Poll: In a changing nation, Santa endures"], Associated Press, December 22, 2006. Retrieved November 18, 2009. Because gift-giving and many other aspects of the Christmas festival involve heightened economic activity, the holiday has become a significant event and a key sales period for retailers and businesses. The economic impact of Christmas is a factor that has grown steadily over the past few centuries in many regions of the world.Etymology"Christmas" is a compound word originating in the term "Christ's Mass". It is derived from the Middle English ''Cristemasse'', which is from Old English ''Crīstesmæsse'', a phrase first recorded in 1038"CathChrit"followed by the word ''Cristes-messe'' in 1131.Cyril Charles Martindale, ["Christmas"], in ''The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 3'', New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908 (accessed December 21, 2012) ''Crīst'' (genitive ''Crīstes'') is from Greek ''Khrīstos'' (Χριστός), a translation of Hebrew ''Māšîaḥ'' (מָשִׁיחַ), "Messiah", meaning "anointed"; and ''mæsse'' is from Latin ''missa'', the celebration of the Eucharist. The form ''Christenmas'' was also historically used, but is now considered archaic and dialectal;''Christenmas, n.'', ''Oxford English Dictionary''. Retrieved December 12. it derives from Middle English ''Cristenmasse'', literally "Christian mass"."Christmas" in the  ''Xmas'' is an abbreviation of ''Christmas'' found particularly in print, based on the initial letter chi (Χ) in Greek ''Khrīstos'' (Χριστός), "Christ", though numerous style guides discourage its use;Griffiths, Emma, ["Why get cross about Xmas?"], BBC, December 22, 2004. Retrieved December 12, 2011. it has precedent in Middle English ''Χρ̄es masse'' (where "Χρ̄" is an abbreviation for Χριστός).XMEDOther namesIn addition to "Christmas", the holiday has been known by various other names throughout its history. The Anglo-Saxons referred to the feast as "midwinter",Hutton, Ronald, '''', Oxford University Press, 2001."Midwinter" in [Bosworth ; Toller] or, more rarely, as ''Nātiuiteð'' (from Latin ''nātīvitās'' below)."Hutton"Serjeantson, Mary Sidney, '' "Nativity", meaning "birth", is from Latin ''nātīvitās''. In Old English, ''Gēola'' (''Yule'') referred to the period corresponding to January and December, which was eventually equated with Christian Christmas., Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved December 12. "Noel" (or "Nowel") entered English in the late 14th century and is from the Old French ''noël'' or ''naël'', itself ultimately from the Latin ''nātālis (diēs)'', "birth (day)". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved December 12.Nativity of JesusNativity of JesusFile:Gerard van Honthorst - Adoration of the Shepherds (1622).jpg|thumb|right|''Adoration of the Shepherds'' by Gerard van Honthorst depicts the nativity of JesusThe canonical gospels of Luke and Matthew both describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem in Judea, to a virgin mother. In the Gospel of Luke account, Joseph and Mary travel from Nazareth to Bethlehem for the census, and Jesus is born there and laid in a manger."biblical literature." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica, 2011. Web. 22 January 2011. . Angels proclaim him a savior for all people, and shepherds come to adore him. In the Matthew account, astronomers follow a star to Bethlehem to bring gifts to Jesus, born the ''King of the Jews''. King Herod orders the massacre of all the boys less than two years old in Bethlehem, but the family flees to Egypt and later settles in Nazareth.File:Nativity (15th c., Annunciation Cathedral in Moscow).jpg|thumb|left|Eastern Orthodox icon of the birth of Christ by St. Andrei Rublev, 15th centuryModern scholars such as E. P. Sanders,  Geza Vermes and Marcus Borg consider both narratives non-historical, arguing that there are contradictions between them.Vermes, Géza (2006-11-02). The Nativity: History and Legend. Penguin Books Ltd. p. 64. ISBN 0-14-102446-1.Sanders, E. P. The historical figure of Jesus. Penguin, 1993. Sanders discusses both birth narratives in detail, contrasts them, and judges them not historical on pp. 85–88.Marcus Borg, 'The Meaning of the Birth Stories' in Marcus Borg, N T Wright, ''The Meaning of Jesus: Two Visions'' (Harper One, 1999) page 179: "I (and most mainline scholars) do not see these stories as historically factual." Many biblical scholars view the discussion of historicity as secondary, given that gospels were primarily written as theological documents rather than historical accounts.''Interpreting Gospel Narratives: Scenes, People, and Theology'' by Timothy Wiarda 2010 ISBN 0-8054-4843-8 pp. 75–78''Jesus, the Christ: Contemporary Perspectives'' by Brennan R. Hill 2004 ISBN 1-58595-303-2 p. 89''The Gospel of Luke'' by Timothy Johnson 1992 ISBN 0-8146-5805-9 p. 72''Recovering Jesus: the witness of the New Testament'' Thomas R. Yoder Neufeld 2007 ISBN 1-58743-202-1 p. 111HistoryFile:Hortus Deliciarum, Die Geburt Christi.JPG|thumb|300px|''Nativity of Christ'' – medieval illustration from the Hortus deliciarum of Herrad of Landsberg (12th century)The Christian ecclesiastical calendar contains many remnants of pre-Christian festivals. Although the dating as December 25 predates pagan influence, the later development of Christmas as a festival includes elements of the Roman feast of the Saturnalia and the birthday of Mithra."The survival of Roman religion" in the section on the history of the  in Encyclopaedia BritannicaThe Chronography of 354 AD contains early evidence of the celebration on December 25 of a Christian liturgical feast of the birth of Jesus. This was in Rome, while in Eastern Christianity the birth of Jesus was already celebrated in connection with the Epiphany on January 6. The December 25 celebration was imported into the East later: in Antioch by John Chrysostom towards the end of the 4th century,Royprobably in 388, and in Alexandria only in the following century. Even in the West, the January 6 celebration of the nativity of Jesus seems to have continued until after 380. In 245, Origen of Alexandria, writing about , commented that Scripture mentions only sinners as ''celebrating'' their birthdays, namely Pharaoh, who then had his chief baker hanged (), and Herod, who then had John the Baptist beheaded (), and mentions saints as ''cursing'' the day of their birth, namely Jeremiah () and Job ().Origen, "Levit., Hom. VIII"; ''Migne P.G.'', XII, 495.partially quoted in "[Natal Day]", ''The Catholic Encyclopedia'', 1911. In 303, Arnobius ridiculed the idea of celebrating the birthdays of gods, a passage cited as evidence that Arnobius was unaware of any nativity celebration.McCracken, George, ''Arnobius of Sicca, the Case Against the Pagans'', Volume 2, p. 83, . "Therefore if this is a fact, how can Jupiter be god if it is agreed that god is everlasting, while the other is represented by you to have a birthday, and frightened by the new experience, to have squalled like an infant."G. Brunner, "Arnobius eine Zeuge gegen das Weihnachtsfest? " JLW 13 (1936) pp. 178–181. Since Christmas does not celebrate Christ's birth "as God" but "as man", this is not evidence against Christmas being a feast at this time."CathChrit"The fact the Donatists of North Africa celebrated Christmas may indicate that the feast was established by the time that church was created in 311.Many popular customs associated with Christmas developed independently of the commemoration of Jesus' birth, with certain elements having origins in pre-Christian festivals that were celebrated around the winter solstice by pagan populations who were later converted to Christianity. These elements, including the Yule log from Yule and gift giving from Saturnalia, – Ball State University. Swartz Jr., BK. Archived version. Retrieved October 19, 2011. became syncretized into Christmas over the centuries. The prevailing atmosphere of Christmas has also continually evolved since the holiday's inception, ranging from a sometimes raucous, drunken, carnival-like state in the Middle Ages,Murray, Alexander, , ''History Today'', December 1986, '''36''' (12), pp. 31 – 39. to a tamer family-oriented and children-centered theme introduced in a 19th-century transformation. Additionally, the celebration of Christmas was banned on more than one occasion within certain Protestant groups, such as the Puritans, due to concerns that it was too pagan or unbiblical.Durston, Chris, , ''History Today'', December 1985, '''35''' (12) pp. 7 – 14.  Also Jehovas Witnesses reject Christmas celebration.right|Mosaic of Jesus as ''Christo Sole'' (Christ the Sun) in Mausoleum M in the pre-fourth-century necropolis under St Peter's Basilica in Rome.Relation to concurrent celebrationsPrior to and through the early Christian centuries, winter festivals—especially those centered on the winter solstice—were the most popular of the year in many European pagan cultures. Reasons included the fact that less agricultural work needed to be done during the winter, as well as an expectation of better weather as spring approached."["Christmas – An Ancient Holiday"], ''The History Channel'', 2007. Many modern Christmas customs have been directly influenced by such festivals, including gift-giving and merrymaking from the Roman Saturnalia, greenery, lights, and charity from the Roman New Year, and Yule logs and various foods from Germanic feasts.Coffman, Elesha. [Why December 25?] ''Christian History ; Biography'', ''Christianity Today'', 2000. The Egyptian deity Horus, son to goddess Isis, was celebrated at the winter solstice. Horus was often depicted being fed by his mother, which also influenced the symbolism of the Virgin Mary with baby Christ.Pagan Scandinavia celebrated a winter festival called Yule, held in the late December to early January period.Simek (2007:379).  The word was in use in Old English (as ''geōl(a)'') by 900, to indicate Christmastide. The ''American Heritage Dictionary'' defines the word as "Christmas or the Christmas season, especially as traditionally celebrated in Northern Europe and North America with customs stemming in part from pagan celebrations of the winter solstice". The vikings celebrated to the honour of their gods during three days, with much eating and drinking with friends and by-passers, called to ''drink Yule''. After the Christianisation of Scandinavia the celebration was allowed as long as it was in the name of Christ instead.In eastern Europe also, old pagan traditions were incorporated into Christmas celebrations, an example being the Koleda, which was incorporated into the Christmas carol.Choice of December 25 dateOne theory to explain the choice of December 25 for the celebration of the birth of Jesus is that the purpose was to Christianize the pagan festival in Rome of the ''Dies Natalis Solis Invicti'', meaning "the birthday of the Unconquered Sun", a festival inaugurated by the Roman emperor Aurelian (270–275) to celebrate the sun god and celebrated at the winter solstice, December 25. According to this theory, during the reign of the emperor Constantine (306-337), Christian writers assimilated this feast as the birthday of Jesus, associating him with the "sun of righteousness" mentioned in NRSV (''Sol Iustitiae'')."Snyder2003""Browning2009"An explicit expression of this theory appears in an annotation of uncertain date added to a manuscript of a work by 12th-century Syrian bishop Jacob Bar-Salibi. The scribe who added it wrote: "It was a custom of the Pagans to celebrate on the same 25December the birthday of the Sun, at which they kindled lights in token of festivity. In these solemnities and revelries the Christians also took part. Accordingly when the doctors of the Church perceived that the Christians had a leaning to this festival, they took counsel and resolved that the true Nativity should be solemnised on that day." (cited in ''Christianity and Paganism in the Fourth to Eighth Centuries'', Ramsay MacMullen. Yale:1997, p. 155) This idea became popular especially in the 18th and 19th centuries.[1908 Catholic Encyclopedia: Christmas]: ''Natalis Invicti''In the judgement of the Church of England Liturgical Commission, this view has been challenged"Although this view is still very common, it has been seriously challenged"– Church of England Liturgical Commission, ''The Promise of His Glory: Services and Prayers for the Season from All Saints to Candlemas" (Church House Publishing 1991 ISBN 978-0-71513738-3) quoted in [The Date of Christmas and Epiphany] by a view based on an old tradition, according to which the date of Christmas was fixed at nine months after March 25, the date of the vernal equinox, on which the Annunciation was celebrated.''Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church'' (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3), article "Christmas" This alternative view is considered academically to be "a thoroughly viable hypothesis", though not certain. The Jewish calendar date of 14Nisan was believed to be that of creation,See discussion in the Talmud (, and Aryeh Kaplan's , "The Shofar of Mercy", on the apparent contradiction between that tradition and the Jewish celebration of creation on 1 Tishrei. as well as of the Exodus and so of Passover, and Christians held that the new creation, both the death of Jesus and the beginning of his human life, occurred on the same date, which some put at March 25 in the Julian calendar.CofEAlexander V.G. Allen, ''Christian Institutions'' (Scribner, New York 1897), p.474 It was a traditional Jewish belief that great men lived a whole number of years, without fractions, so that Jesus was considered to have been conceived on March 25, as he died on March 25, which was calculated to have coincided with 14Nisan. Sextus Julius Africanus (c.160 – c.240) gave March 25 as the day of creation and of the conception of Jesus. In his work ''Adversus Haereses'', Irenaeus (c.130–202) identified the conception of Jesus as March 25 and linked it to the crucifixion at the time of the equinox, with the birth of Jesus nine months after on December 25 at the time of the solstice."Anderson"An anonymous work known as ''De Pascha Computus'' (243) linked the idea that creation began at the spring equinox, on March 25, with the conception or birth (the word ''nascor'' can mean either) of Jesus on March 28, the day of the creation of the sun in the Genesis account. One translation reads: "O the splendid and divine providence of the Lord, that on that day, the very day, on which the sun was made, the 28 March, a Wednesday, Christ should be born. For this reason Malachi the prophet, speaking about him to the people, fittingly said, 'Unto you shall the sun of righteousness arise, and healing is in his wings.'""CathChrit"The tractate ''De solstitia et aequinoctia conceptionis et nativitatis Domini nostri Iesu Christi et Iohannis Baptistae'' falsely attributed to John Chrysostom also argued that Jesus was conceived and crucified on the same day of the year and calculated this as March 25.ODCCSennThis anonymous tract also states: "But Our Lord, too, is born in the month of December... the eight before the calends of January [25 December]..., But they call it the 'Birthday of the Unconquered'. Who indeed is so unconquered as Our Lord...? Or, if they say that it is the birthday of the Sun, He is the Sun of Justice.""CathChrit"A passage of the ''Commentary on the prophet Daniel'' by Hippolytus of Rome, written in about 204, has also been appealed to.With regard to a December religious feast of the sun as a god (Sol), as distinct from a solstice feast of the (re)birth of the astronomical sun, one scholar has commented that, "while the winter solstice on or around December 25 was well established in the Roman imperial calendar, there is no evidence that a religious celebration of Sol on that day antedated the celebration of Christmas"., p. 588  "Thomas Talley has shown that, although the Emperor Aurelian's dedication of a temple to the sun god in the Campus Martius (C.E. 274) probably took place on the 'Birthday of the Invincible Sun' on December 25, the cult of the sun in pagan Rome ironically did not celebrate the winter solstice nor any of the other quarter-tense days, as one might expect."Michael Alan Anderson, ''Symbols of Saints'' (ProQuest 2008 ISBN 978-0-54956551-2), pp. 42–46 The ''Oxford Companion to Christian Thought'' remarks on the uncertainty about the order of precedence between the religious celebrations of the Birthday of the Unconquered Sun and of the birthday of Jesus, stating that the hypothesis that December 25 was chosen for celebrating the birth of Jesus on the basis of the belief that his conception occurred on March 25 "potentially establishes 25 December as a Christian festival before Aurelian's decree, which, when promulgated, might have provided for the Christian feast both opportunity and challenge".Adrian Hastings, Alistair Mason, Hugh Pyper (editors), '''' (Oxford University Press 2000 ISBN 978-0-19860024-4), p. 114The Chronography of 354, an illuminated manuscript compiled in Rome, is an early reference to the date of the nativity as December 25.This document was prepared privately for a Roman aristocrat. The reference in question states, "VIII kal. ian. natus Christus in Betleem Iudeæ". It is in a section copied from an earlier manuscript produced in 336. This document also contains the earliest known reference to the feast of Sol Invictus. In the East, early Christians celebrated the birth of Christ as part of Epiphany (January 6), although this festival emphasized celebration of the baptism of Jesus.Pokhilko, Hieromonk Nicholas, ["History of Epiphany"]Christmas was promoted in the Christian East as part of the revival of Nicene Christianity following the death of the pro-Arian Emperor Valens at the Battle of Adrianople in 378. The feast was introduced to Constantinople in 379, and to Antioch in about 380. The feast disappeared after Gregory of Nazianzus resigned as bishop in 381, although it was reintroduced by John Chrysostom in about 400."CathChrit"Middle AgesFile:Nativity from Sherbrooke Missal cropped.jpg|thumb|left|''The Nativity'', from a 14th-century Missal; a liturgical book containing texts and music necessary for the celebration of Mass throughout the yearIn the Early Middle Ages, Christmas Day was overshadowed by Epiphany, which in western Christianity focused on the visit of the magi. But the medieval calendar was dominated by Christmas-related holidays. The forty days before Christmas became the "forty days of St. Martin" (which began on November 11, the feast of St. Martin of Tours), now known as Advent."Murray"In Italy, former Saturnalian traditions were attached to Advent."Murray"Around the 12th century, these traditions transferred again to the Twelve Days of Christmas (December 25 – January 5); a time that appears in the liturgical calendars as Christmastide or Twelve Holy Days."Murray"The prominence of Christmas Day increased gradually after Charlemagne was crowned Emperor on Christmas Day in 800. King Edmund the Martyr was anointed on Christmas in 855 and King William I of England was crowned on Christmas Day 1066.File:Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld (German - The Coronation of Charlemagne - Google Art Project.jpg|alt=|thumb|The coronation of Charlemagne on Christmas of 800 helped promote the popularity of the holidayBy the High Middle Ages, the holiday had become so prominent that chroniclers routinely noted where various magnates celebrated Christmas. King Richard II of England hosted a Christmas feast in 1377 at which twenty-eight oxen and three hundred sheep were eaten."Murray"The Yule boar was a common feature of medieval Christmas feasts. Caroling also became popular, and was originally a group of dancers who sang. The group was composed of a lead singer and a ring of dancers that provided the chorus. Various writers of the time condemned caroling as lewd, indicating that the unruly traditions of Saturnalia and Yule may have continued in this form."Murray""Misrule"—drunkenness, promiscuity, gambling—was also an important aspect of the festival. In England, gifts were exchanged on New Year's Day, and there was special Christmas ale."Murray"Christmas during the Middle Ages was a public festival that incorporated ivy, holly, and other evergreens.mcgreevyChristmas gift-giving during the Middle Ages was usually between people with legal relationships, such as tenant and landlord.McGreevy, Patrick. "Place in the American Christmas," (), ''Geographical Review'', Vol. 80, No. 1. January 1990, pp. 32–42. Retrieved September 10, 2007. The annual indulgence in eating, dancing, singing, sporting, and card playing escalated in England, and by the 17th century the Christmas season featured lavish dinners, elaborate masques, and pageants. In 1607, King James I insisted that a play be acted on Christmas night and that the court indulge in games.BTRIt was during the Reformation in 16th–17th-century Europe that many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or ''Christkindl'', and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve.ADSReformation to the 18th centuryFollowing the Protestant Reformation, many of the new denominations, including the Anglican Church and Lutheran Church, continued to celebrate Christmas. In 1629, the Anglican poet John Milton penned ''On the Morning of Christ's Nativity'', a poem that has since been read by many during Christmastide. Donald Heinz, a professor at California State University, states that Martin Luther "inaugurated a period in which Germany would produce a unique culture of Christmas, much copied in North America." Among the congregations of the Dutch Reformed Church, Christmas was celebrated as one of the principal evangelical feasts.However, in 17th century England, some groups such as the Puritans, strongly condemned the celebration of Christmas, considering it a Catholic invention and the "trappings of popery" or the "rags of the Beast"."Durston"In contrast, the established Anglican Church "pressed for a more elaborate observance of feasts, penitential seasons, and saints' days. The calendar reform became a major point of tension between the Anglican party and the Puritan party." The Catholic Church also responded, promoting the festival in a more religiously oriented form. King Charles I of England directed his noblemen and gentry to return to their landed estates in midwinter to keep up their old-style Christmas generosity.BTRFollowing the Parliamentarian victory over Charles I during the English Civil War, England's Puritan rulers banned Christmas in 1647."Durston"Protests followed as pro-Christmas rioting broke out in several cities and for weeks Canterbury was controlled by the rioters, who decorated doorways with holly and shouted royalist slogans."Durston"The book, ''The Vindication of Christmas'' (London, 1652), argued against the Puritans, and makes note of Old English Christmas traditions, dinner, roast apples on the fire, card playing, dances with "plow-boys" and "maidservants", old Father Christmas and carol singing.left|''The Examination and Trial of Father Christmas'', (1686), published after Christmas was reinstated as a holy day in England.The Restoration of King Charles II in 1660 ended the ban, but many Calvinist clergymen still disapproved of Christmas celebration. As such, in Scotland, the Presbyterian Church of Scotland discouraged the observance of Christmas, and though James VI commanded its celebration in 1618, attendance at church was scant.Chambers, Robert (1885). ''Domestic Annals of Scotland''. p. 211.The Parliament of Scotland officially abolished the observance of Christmas in 1640, claiming that the church had been "purged of all superstitious observation of days". It was not until 1958 that Christmas again became a Scottish public holiday.Following the Restoration of Charles II, ''Poor Robin's Almanack'' contained the lines: "Now thanks to God for Charles return, / Whose absence made old Christmas mourn. / For then we scarcely did it know, / Whether it Christmas were or no." The diary of James Woodforde, from the latter half of the 18th century, details the observance of Christmas and celebrations associated with the season over a number of years.In Colonial America, the Puritans of New England shared radical Protestant disapproval of Christmas. Celebration was outlawed in Boston from 1659 to 1681. The ban by the Pilgrims was revoked in 1681 by English governor Edmund Andros, however it was not until the mid-19th century that celebrating Christmas became fashionable in the Boston region."Bostonban"At the same time, Christian residents of Virginia and New York observed the holiday freely. Pennsylvania German Settlers, pre-eminently the Moravian settlers of Bethlehem, Nazareth and Lititz in Pennsylvania and the Wachovia Settlements in North Carolina, were enthusiastic celebrators of Christmas. The Moravians in Bethlehem had the first Christmas trees in America as well as the first Nativity Scenes. Christmas fell out of favor in the United States after the American Revolution, when it was considered an English custom.George Washington attacked Hessian (German) mercenaries on the day after Christmas during the Battle of Trenton on December 26, 1776, Christmas being much more popular in Germany than in America at this time.19th centuryFile:Scrooges third visitor-John Leech,1843 edit.jpg|thumb|right|Ebenezer Scrooge and the Ghost of Christmas Present. From Charles Dickens' ''A Christmas Carol'', 1843.In the early 19th century, writers imagined Tudor Christmas as a time of heartfelt celebration. In 1843, Charles Dickens wrote the novel ''A Christmas Carol'' that helped revive the "spirit" of Christmas and seasonal merriment.standifordAFPIts instant popularity played a major role in portraying Christmas as a holiday emphasizing family, goodwill, and compassion.Rowell, Geoffrey, ''Dickens and the Construction of Christmas'', History Today, Volume: 43 Issue: 12, December 1993, pp. 17 – 24Dickens sought to construct Christmas as a family-centered festival of generosity, in contrast to the community-based and church-centered observations, the observance of which had dwindled during the late 18th century and early 19th century.Ronald Hutton ''Stations of the Sun: The Ritual Year in England''. 1996. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-285448-8. Superimposing his humanitarian vision of the holiday, in what has been termed "Carol Philosophy", Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are celebrated today in Western culture, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit. A prominent phrase from the tale, "Merry Christmas", was popularized following the appearance of the story. This coincided with the appearance of the Oxford Movement and the growth of Anglo-Catholicism, which led a revival in traditional rituals and religious observances.Ronald Hutton ''Stations of the Sun: The Ritual Year in England''. 1996. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 113. ISBN 0-19-285448-8.left|upright|The Queen's Christmas tree at Windsor Castle, published in the ''Illustrated London News'', 1848, and republished in ''Godey's Lady's Book'', Philadelphia, December 1850The term Scrooge became a synonym for miser, with Humbug|"Bah! Humbug!" dismissive of the festive spirit. In 1843, the first commercial Christmas card was produced by Sir Henry Cole. The revival of the Christmas Carol began with William Sandys's "Christmas Carols Ancient and Modern" (1833), with the first appearance in print of "The First Noel", "I Saw Three Ships", "Hark the Herald Angels Sing" and "God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen", popularized in Dickens' ''A Christmas Carol''.In Britain, the Christmas tree was introduced in the early 19th century following the personal union with the Kingdom of Hanover by Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, wife of King George III. In 1832, the future Queen Victoria wrote about her delight at having a Christmas tree, hung with lights, ornaments, and presents placed round it.The girlhood of Queen Victoria: a selection from Her Majesty's diaries. p.61. Longmans, Green ; co., 1912. University of Wisconsin After her marriage to her German cousin Prince Albert, by 1841 the custom became more widespread throughout Britain."Lejeune, Marie Claire p.550"An image of the British royal family with their Christmas tree at Windsor Castle created a sensation when it was published in the ''Illustrated London News'' in 1848. A modified version of this image was published in the United States in 1850."Shoemaker"''Godey's Lady's Book'', 1850. ''Godey's'' copied it exactly, except he removed the Queen's tiara, and Prince Albert's mustache, to remake the engraving into an American scene. By the 1870s, putting up a Christmas tree had become common in America."Shoemaker"In America, interest in Christmas had been revived in the 1820s by several short stories by Washington Irving which appear in his ''The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.'' and "Old Christmas". Irving's stories depicted harmonious warm-hearted English Christmas festivities he experienced while staying in Aston Hall, Birmingham, England, that had largely been abandoned, and he used the tract ''Vindication of Christmas'' (1652) of Old English Christmas traditions, that he had transcribed into his journal as a format for his stories.File:Adolph Tidemand Norsk juleskik.jpg|thumb|A Norwegian Christmas, 1846 painting by Adolph TidemandIn 1822, Clement Clarke Moore wrote the poem ''A Visit From St. Nicholas'' (popularly known by its first line: ''Twas the Night Before Christmas'').Moore's poem transferred the genuine old Dutch traditions celebrated at New Year in New York, including the exchange of gifts, family feasting, and tales of "sinterklass" (a derivation in Dutch from "Saint Nicholas", from whence comes the modern "Santa Claus") to Christmas.[''The history of Christmas: Christmas history in America''], 2006The poem helped popularize the tradition of exchanging gifts, and seasonal Christmas shopping began to assume economic importance.usinfo.state.gov  November 26, 2006This also started the cultural conflict between the holiday's spiritual significance and its associated commercialism that some see as corrupting the holiday. In her 1850 book ''The First Christmas in New England'', Harriet Beecher Stowe includes a character who complains that the true meaning of Christmas was lost in a shopping spree.First Presbyterian Church of Watertown  December 11, 2005While the celebration of Christmas was not yet customary in some regions in the U.S., Henry Wadsworth Longfellow detected "a transition state about Christmas here in New England" in 1856. "The old puritan feeling prevents it from being a cheerful, hearty holiday; though every year makes it more so."Restad, Penne L. (1995), Christmas in America: a History. p.96. Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-510980-5In Reading, Pennsylvania, a newspaper remarked in 1861, "Even our presbyterian friends who have hitherto steadfastly ignored Christmas—threw open their church doors and assembled in force to celebrate the anniversary of the Savior's birth."APHThe First Congregational Church of Rockford, Illinois, "although of genuine Puritan stock", was 'preparing for a grand Christmas jubilee', a news correspondent reported in 1864.APHBy 1860, fourteen states including several from New England had adopted Christmas as a legal holiday. In 1875, Louis Prang introduced the Christmas card to Americans. He has been called the "father of the American Christmas card".Meggs, Philip B. A History of Graphic Design. ©1998 John Wiley ; Sons, Inc. p 148 ISBN 0-471-29198-6On June 26, 1870, Christmas was formally declared a United States federal holiday.20th centuryUp to the 1950s, in the UK, many Christmas customs were restricted to the upper classes and better-off families. The mass of the population had not adopted many of the Christmas rituals that later became general. The Christmas tree was rare. Christmas dinner might be beef — certainly not turkey. In their stockings children might get an apple, orange and sweets. Full celebration of a family Christmas with all the trimmings only became widespread with increased prosperity from the 1950s. National papers were published on Christmas Day until 1912. Post was still delivered on Christmas Day until 1961. League football matches continued in Scotland until the 1970s while in England they ceased at the end of the 1950s.Under the state atheism of the Soviet Union, after its foundation in 1917, Christmas celebrations—along with other Christian holidays—were prohibited in public. During the 1920s, 30s and 40s, the League of Militant Atheists encouraged school pupils to campaign against Christmas traditions, such as the Christmas tree, as well as other Christian holidays, including Easter; the League established an antireligious holiday to be the 31st of each month as a replacement. At the height of this persecution, in 1929, on Christmas Day, children in Moscow were encouraged to spit on crucifixes as a protest against the holiday. It was not until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 that the persecution ended and Orthodox Christmas became a state holiday again for the first time in Russia after seven decades.As Christmas celebrations began to be held around the world even outside traditional Christian cultures in the 20th century, some Muslim-majority countries have banned the practice of Christmas, claiming it undermines Islam.Customs and traditionsChristmas traditionsFile:Map of Countries that do not recognize Christmas as Public Holiday.png|thumbnail|right|300px|Map of countries where Christmas is not a formal public holiday either on December 24/25 or January 6/7.Christmas Day is celebrated as a major festival and public holiday in countries around the world, including many whose populations are mostly non-Christian. In some non-Christian areas, periods of former colonial rule introduced the celebration (e.g. Hong Kong); in others, Christian minorities or foreign cultural influences have led populations to observe the holiday. Countries such as Japan, where Christmas is popular despite there being only a small number of Christians, have adopted many of the secular aspects of Christmas, such as gift-giving, decorations, and Christmas trees.Countries in which Christmas is not a formal public holiday include Afghanistan, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bhutan, Cambodia, China (excepting Hong Kong and Macao), Comoros, Iran, Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Laos, Libya, Maldives, Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, North Korea, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, and Yemen. Christmas celebrations around the world can vary markedly in form, reflecting differing cultural and national traditions.Among countries with a strong Christian tradition, a variety of Christmas celebrations have developed that incorporate regional and local cultures. For Christians, participating in a religious service plays an important part in the recognition of the season. Christmas, along with Easter, is the period of highest annual church attendance. In Catholic countries, people hold religious processions or parades in the days preceding Christmas. In other countries, secular processions or parades featuring Santa Claus and other seasonal figures are often held. Family reunions and the exchange of gifts are a widespread feature of the season. Gift giving takes place on Christmas Day in most countries. Others practice gift giving on December 6, Saint Nicholas Day, and January 6, Epiphany.DecorationsChristmas decorationFile:Nacimiento napolitano.jpg|thumb|right|250px| A typical Neapolitan ''presepe''/''presepio'', or Nativity scene. Local crèches are renowned for their ornate decorations and symbolic figurines, often mirroring daily life.The practice of putting up special decorations at Christmas has a long history. In the 15th century, it was recorded that in London it was the custom at Christmas for every house and all the parish churches to be "decked with holm, ivy, bays, and whatsoever the season of the year afforded to be green". The heart-shaped leaves of ivy were said to symbolize the coming to earth of Jesus, while holly was seen as protection against pagans and witches, its thorns and red berries held to represent the Crown of Thorns worn by Jesus at the crucifixion and the blood he shed.Heller, Ruth, ''Christmas: Its Carols, Customs ; Legends'', Alfred Publishing (1985), ISBN 0-7692-4399-1, p. 12.Clifton Mill in Clifton, Ohio is the site of this Christmas display with over 3.5 million lights.Nativity scenes are known from 10th-century Rome. They were popularised by Saint Francis of Asissi from 1223, quickly spreading across Europe. Different types of decorations developed across the Christian world, dependent on local tradition and available resources, and can vary from simple representations of the crib to far more elaborate sets – renowned manger scene traditions include the colourful ''Kraków szopka'' in Poland, Susan Topp Weber, ''Nativities of the World'', Gibbs Smith, 2013 which imitate Kraków's historical buildings as settings, the elaborate Italian ''presepi'' (Neapolitan, Genoese and Bolognese), David Bershad, Carolina Mangone, ''The Christian Travelers Guide to Italy'', Zondervan, 2001 or the Provence|Provençal crèches in southern France, using hand-painted terracotta figurines called ''santons''. In certain parts of the world, notably Sicily, living nativity scenes following the tradition of Saint Francis are a popular alternative to static crèches. Carl Seaburg, ''Celebrating Christmas: An Anthology'', iUniverse, 2003 Gerry Bowler, ''The World Encyclopedia of Christmas'', Random House LLC, 2012 The first commercially produced decorations appeared in Germany in the 1860s, inspired by paper chains made by children. In countries where a representation of the Nativity scene is very popular, people are encouraged to compete and create the most original or realistic ones. Within some families, the pieces used to make the representation are considered a valuable family heirloom.The traditional colors of Christmas decorations are red, green, and gold. Red symbolizes the blood of Jesus, which was shed in his crucifixion, while green symbolizes eternal life, and in particular the evergreen tree, which does not lose its leaves in the winter, and gold is the first color associated with Christmas, as one of the three gifts of the Magi, symbolizing royalty."Ace Collins"File:Advent Wreath (Broadway United Methodist Church).jpg|thumb|170px|right|On Christmas Day, the Christ Candle in the center of the Advent wreath is traditionally lit in many church services.The Christmas tree is considered by some as Christianisation of pagan tradition and ritual surrounding the Winter Solstice, which included the use of evergreen boughs, and an adaptation of pagan tree worship;Shamanaccording to eighth-century biographer Æddi Stephanus, Saint Boniface (634–709), who was a missionary in Germany, took an axe to an oak tree dedicated to Thor and pointed out a fir tree, which he stated was a more fitting object of reverence because it pointed to heaven and it had a triangular shape, which he said was symbolic of the Trinity. The English language phrase "Christmas tree" is first recorded in 1835Harper, Douglas, [Christ], ''Online Etymology Dictionary'', 2001. and represents an importation from the German language. The modern Christmas tree tradition is believed to have begun in Germany in the 18th century though many argue that Martin Luther began the tradition in the 16th century.File:Rockefeller Center christmas tree cropped.jpg|thumb|upright|left|170px|The famous Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree in New York CityFrom Germany the custom was introduced to Britain, first via Queen Charlotte, wife of George III, and then more successfully by Prince Albert during the reign of Queen Victoria. By 1841 the Christmas tree had become even more widespread throughout Britain.Lejeune, Marie Claire. ''Compendium of symbolic and ritual plants in Europe'', p.550. University of Michigan ISBN 90-77135-04-9 By the 1870s, people in the United States had adopted the custom of putting up a Christmas tree.Shoemaker, Alfred Lewis. (1959) ''Christmas in Pennsylvania: a folk-cultural study.'' Edition 40. pp. 52, 53. Stackpole Books 1999. ISBN 0-8117-0328-2. Christmas trees may be decorated with lights and ornaments.Since the 19th century, the poinsettia, a native plant from Mexico, has been associated with Christmas. Other popular holiday plants include holly, mistletoe, red amaryllis, and Christmas cactus. Along with a Christmas tree, the interior of a home may be decorated with these plants, along with garlands and evergreen foliage. The display of Christmas villages has also become a tradition in many homes during this season. The outside of houses may be decorated with lights and sometimes with illuminated sleighs, snowmen, and other Christmas figures.Other traditional decorations include bells, candles, candy canes, stockings, wreaths, and angels. Both the displaying of wreaths and candles in each window are a more traditional Christmas display. The concentric assortment of leaves, usually from an evergreen, make up Christmas wreaths and are designed to prepare Christians for the Advent season. Candles in each window are meant to demonstrate the fact that Christians believe that Jesus Christ is the ultimate light of the world.Christmas lights and banners may be hung along streets, music played from speakers, and Christmas trees placed in prominent places.Murray, Brian. ["Christmas lights and community building in America,"] ''History Matters'', Spring 2006.  It is common in many parts of the world for town squares and consumer shopping areas to sponsor and display decorations. Rolls of brightly colored paper with secular or religious Christmas motifs are manufactured for the purpose of wrapping gifts. In some countries, Christmas decorations are traditionally taken down on Twelfth Night, the evening of January 5.Music and carolsChristmas musicFile:Chant'tie d'Cantiques dé Noué Dézembre 2009 Jèrri a.jpg|thumb|Christmas carolers in JerseyThe earliest extant specifically Christmas hymns appear in 4th-century Rome. Latin hymns such as "Veni redemptor gentium", written by Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, were austere statements of the theological doctrine of the Incarnation in opposition to Arianism. "Corde natus ex Parentis" ("Of the Father's love begotten") by the Spanish poet Prudentius (d. 413) is still sung in some churches today.In the 9th and 10th centuries, the Christmas "Sequence" or "Prose" was introduced in North European monasteries, developing under Bernard of Clairvaux into a sequence of rhymed stanzas. In the 12th century the Parisian monk Adam of St. Victor began to derive music from popular songs, introducing something closer to the traditional Christmas carol.By the 13th century, in France, Germany, and particularly, Italy, under the influence of Francis of Asissi, a strong tradition of popular Christmas songs in the native language developed.Miles, pp. 31–37 Christmas carols in English first appear in a 1426 work of John Awdlay, a Shropshire chaplain, who lists twenty-five "caroles of Cristemas", probably sung by groups of wassailers, who went from house to house.Miles, pp. 47–48File:Steaua, Bucharest, 1842 crop.jpg|thumb|left|Child singers in Bucharest, 1841The songs we know specifically as carols were originally communal folk songs sung during celebrations such as "harvest tide" as well as Christmas. It was only later that carols began to be sung in church. Traditionally, carols have often been based on medieval chord patterns, and it is this that gives them their uniquely characteristic musical sound. Some carols like "Personent hodie", "Good King Wenceslas", and "The Holly and the Ivy" can be traced directly back to the Middle Ages. They are among the oldest musical compositions still regularly sung. "Adeste Fideles" (O Come all ye faithful) appears in its current form in the mid-18th century, although the words may have originated in the 13th century.Singing of carols initially suffered a decline in popularity after the Protestant Reformation in northern Europe, although some Reformers, like Martin Luther, wrote carols and encouraged their use in worship. Carols largely survived in rural communities until the revival of interest in popular songs in the 19th century. The 18th-century English reformer Charles Wesley understood the importance of music to worship. In addition to setting many psalms to melodies, which were influential in the Great Awakening in the United States, he wrote texts for at least three Christmas carols. The best known was originally entitled "Hark! How All the Welkin Rings", later renamed "Hark! the Herald Angels Sing".Felix Mendelssohn wrote a melody adapted to fit Wesley's words. In Austria in 1818 Mohr and Gruber made a major addition to the genre when they composed "Silent Night" for the St. Nicholas Church, Oberndorf. William Sandys' ''Christmas Carols Ancient and Modern'' (1833) contained the first appearance in print of many now-classic English carols, and contributed to the mid-Victorian revival of the festival.Completely secular Christmas seasonal songs emerged in the late 18th century. "Deck the Halls" dates from 1784, and the American "Jingle Bells" was copyrighted in 1857. In the 19th and 20th century, African American spirituals and songs about Christmas, based in their tradition of spirituals, became more widely known. An increasing number of seasonal holidays songs were commercially produced in the 20th century, including jazz and blues variations. In addition, there was a revival of interest in early music, from groups singing folk music, such as The Revels, to performers of early medieval and classical music.Traditional cuisineFile:Christmas pudding.JPG|thumb|right|Christmas pudding cooked on Stir-up Sunday, the Sunday before the beginning of the Advent seasonA special Christmas family meal is traditionally an important part of the holiday's celebration, and the food that is served varies greatly from country to country. Some regions, such as Sicily, have special meals for Christmas Eve, when 12 kinds of fish are served. In the United Kingdom and countries influenced by its traditions, a standard Christmas meal includes turkey, goose or other large bird, gravy, potatoes, vegetables, sometimes bread and cider. Special desserts are also prepared, such as Christmas pudding, mince pies, fruit cake and Yule log cake.Broomfield, Andrea (2007)  pp.149–150. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007Muir, Frank (1977) ''Christmas customs ; traditions'' p.58. Taplinger Pub. Co., 1977In Poland and other parts of eastern Europe and Scandinavia, fish often is used for the traditional main course, but richer meat such as lamb is increasingly served. In Sweden it is common with a special variety of smörgåsbord, where ham, meatballs and herring play a prominent role. In Germany, France, and Austria, goose and pork are favored. Beef, ham, and chicken in various recipes are popular throughout the world. The Maltese traditionally serve ''Imbuljuta tal-Qastan'', a chocolate and chestnuts beverage, after Midnight Mass and throughout the Christmas season. Slovaks prepare the traditional Christmas bread potica, ''bûche de Noël'' in France, ''panettone'' in Italy, and elaborate tarts and cakes. The eating of sweets and chocolates has become popular worldwide, and sweeter Christmas delicacies include the German ''stollen'', marzipan cake or candy, and Jamaican rum fruit cake. As one of the few fruits traditionally available to northern countries in winter, oranges have been long associated with special Christmas foods. Eggnog is a sweetened dairy-based beverage traditionally made with milk and/or cream, sugar, and whipped eggs (which gives it a frothy texture). Spirits such as brandy, rum or bourbon are often added. The finished serving is often garnished with a sprinkling of ground cinnamon or nutmeg.CardsFile:Chrisrmas postcard 1907.jpg|alt=|thumb|A 1907 Christmas card with Santa and some of his reindeerChristmas cardChristmas cards are illustrated messages of greeting exchanged between friends and family members during the weeks preceding Christmas Day. The traditional greeting reads "wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year", much like that of the first commercial Christmas card, produced by Sir Henry Cole in London in 1843.[Christmas card sold for record price] BBC News. Retrieved October 28, 2011 The custom of sending them has become popular among a wide cross-section of people with the emergence of the modern trend towards exchanging E-cards.Christmas cards are purchased in considerable quantities, and feature artwork, commercially designed and relevant to the season. The content of the design might relate directly to the Christmas narrative with depictions of the Nativity of Jesus, or Christian symbols such as the Star of Bethlehem, or a white dove which can represent both the Holy Spirit and Peace on Earth. Other Christmas cards are more secular and can depict Christmas traditions, mythical figures such as Santa Claus, objects directly associated with Christmas such as candles, holly and baubles, or a variety of images associated with the season, such as Christmastide activities, snow scenes and the wildlife of the northern winter. There are even humorous cards and genres depicting nostalgic scenes of the past such as crinolined shoppers in idealized 19th century streetscapes.Some prefer cards with a poem, prayer, or Biblical verse; while others distance themselves from religion with an all-inclusive "Season's greetings".Commemorative stampsChristmas stampFile:United States Christmas stamp 1982 Madonna of the Goldfinch, Giovanni Battista Tiepolo c. 1760.jpg|thumb|left|150px|Christmas stamp released in the United States in 1982, featuring a painting by Giovanni Battista TiepoloA number of nations have issued commemorative stamps at Christmastide. Postal customers will often use these stamps to mail Christmas cards, and they are popular with philatelists. These stamps are regular postage stamps, unlike Christmas seals, and are valid for postage year-round. They usually go on sale some time between early October and early December, and are printed in considerable quantities.In 1898 a Canadian stamp was issued to mark the inauguration of the Imperial Penny Postage rate. The stamp features a map of the globe and bears an inscription "XMAS 1898" at the bottom. In 1937, Austria issued two "Christmas greeting stamps" featuring a rose and the signs of the zodiac. In 1939, Brazil issued four semi-postal stamps with designs featuring the three kings and a star of Bethlehem, an angel and child, the Southern Cross and a child, and a mother and child.Both the US Postal Service and the United Kingdom's Royal Mail regularly issue Christmas-themed stamps each year.Gift givingChristmas gifts underneath a Christmas tree.The exchanging of gifts is one of the core aspects of the modern Christmas celebration, making it the most profitable time of year for retailers and businesses throughout the world. On Christmas, people exchange gifts based on the Christian tradition associated with St. Nicholas, and the gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh which were given to the baby Jesus by the Magi. The practice of gift giving in the Roman celebration of Saturnalia may have influenced Christian Christian customs, but on the other hand the Christian "core dogma of the Incarnation, however, solidly established the giving and receiving of gifts as the structural principle of that recurrent yet unique event", because it was the Biblical Magi, "together with all their fellow men, who received the gift of God through man's renewed participation in the divine life."Gift-bearing figuresFather ChristmasChristmas gift-bringers in EuropeFile:Sinterklaas 2007.jpg|thumb|Sinterklaas or Saint Nicholas, considered by many to be the original Santa ClausA number of figures are associated with Christmas and the seasonal giving of gifts. Among these are Father Christmas, also known as Santa Claus (derived from the Dutch for Saint Nicholas), Père Noël, and the Weihnachtsmann; Saint Nicholas or Sinterklaas; the Christkind; Kris Kringle; Joulupukki; tomte; Babbo Natale; Saint Basil; and Ded Moroz. The Scandinavian tomte is sometimes depicted as a gnome instead of Santa Claus.The best known of these figures today is red-dressed Santa Claus, of diverse origins. The name Santa Claus can be traced back to the Dutch ''Sinterklaas'', which means simply Saint Nicholas. Nicholas was a 4th-century Greek bishop of Myra, a city in the Roman province of Lycia, whose ruins are km from modern Demre in southwest Turkey. Among other saintly attributes, he was noted for the care of children, generosity, and the giving of gifts. His feast day, December 6, came to be celebrated in many countries with the giving of gifts.Forbes, Bruce David, ''Christmas: a candid history'', University of California Press, 2007, ISBN 0-520-25104-0, pp. 68–79.Saint Nicholas traditionally appeared in bishop's attire, accompanied by helpers, inquiring about the behaviour of children during the past year before deciding whether they deserved a gift or not. By the 13th century, Saint Nicholas was well known in the Netherlands, and the practice of gift-giving in his name spread to other parts of central and southern Europe. At the Reformation in 16th–17th-century Europe, many Protestants changed the gift bringer to the Christ Child or ''Christkindl'', corrupted in English to Kris Kringle, and the date of giving gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve."ADS"The modern popular image of Santa Claus, however, was created in the United States, and in particular in New York. The transformation was accomplished with the aid of notable contributors including Washington Irving and the German-American cartoonist Thomas Nast (1840–1902). Following the American Revolutionary War, some of the inhabitants of New York City sought out symbols of the city's non-English past. New York had originally been established as the Dutch colonial town of New Amsterdam and the Dutch Sinterklaas tradition was reinvented as Saint Nicholas.In 1809, the New-York Historical Society convened and retroactively named ''Sancte Claus'' the patron saint of Nieuw Amsterdam, the Dutch name for New York City.John Steele Gordon, ''The Great Game: The Emergence of Wall Street as a World Power: 1653–2000'' (Scribner) 1999. At his first American appearance in 1810, Santa Claus was drawn in bishops' robes. However, as new artists took over, Santa Claus developed more secular attire.Forbes, Bruce David, ''Christmas: a candid history'', pp. 80–81. Nast drew a new image of "Santa Claus" annually, beginning in 1863. By the 1880s, Nast's Santa had evolved into the modern vision of the figure, perhaps based on the English figure of Father Christmas. The image was standardized by advertisers in the 1920sMikkelson, Barbara and David P., ["The Claus That Refreshes"], Snopes.com, 2006. and continues through the present day.Father Christmas, a jolly, well nourished, bearded man who typified the spirit of good cheer at Christmas, predates the Santa Claus character. He is first recorded in early 17th century England, but was associated with holiday merrymaking and drunkenness rather than the bringing of gifts.HarperIn Victorian Britain, his image was remade to match that of Santa. The French Père Noël evolved along similar lines, eventually adopting the Santa image. In Italy, Babbo Natale acts as Santa Claus, while La Befana is the bringer of gifts and arrives on the eve of the Epiphany. It is said that La Befana set out to bring the baby Jesus gifts, but got lost along the way. Now, she brings gifts to all children. In some cultures Santa Claus is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht, or Black Peter. In other versions, elves make the toys. His wife is referred to as Mrs. Claus.File:Santa Claus portrayed by Jonathan Meath 4.jpg|thumb|250px|Santa Claus reacts to a toy request (Jonathan Meath as Santa)There has been some opposition to the narrative of the American evolution of Saint Nicholas into the modern Santa. It has been claimed that the Saint Nicholas Society was not founded until 1835, almost half a century after the end of the American War of Independence. Moreover, a study of the "children's books, periodicals and journals" of New Amsterdam by Charles Jones revealed no references to Saint Nicholas or Sinterklaas. However, not all scholars agree with Jones's findings, which he reiterated in a book-length study in 1978; Howard G. Hageman, of New Brunswick Theological Seminary, maintains that the tradition of celebrating Sinterklaas in New York was alive and well from the early settlement of the Hudson Valley on.Current tradition in several Latin American countries (such as Venezuela and Colombia) holds that while Santa makes the toys, he then gives them to the Baby Jesus, who is the one who actually delivers them to the children's homes, a reconciliation between traditional religious beliefs and the iconography of Santa Claus imported from the United States.In South Tyrol (Italy), Austria, Czech Republic, Southern Germany, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Slovakia, and Switzerland, the Christkind (Ježíšek in Czech, Jézuska in Hungarian and Ježiško in Slovak) brings the presents. Greek children get their presents from Saint Basil on New Year's Eve, the eve of that saint's liturgical feast. The German St. Nikolaus is not identical with the Weihnachtsmann (who is the German version of Santa Claus / Father Christmas). St. Nikolaus wears a bishop's dress and still brings small gifts (usually candies, nuts, and fruits) on December 6 and is accompanied by Knecht Ruprecht. Although many parents around the world routinely teach their children about Santa Claus and other gift bringers, some have come to reject this practice, considering it deceptive.Matera, Mariane. ["Santa: The First Great Lie"], ''Citybeat'', Issue 304DateAnno DominiIrenaeus (c. 130–202) viewed Christ's conception as March 25 in association with the Passion, with the nativity nine months after on December 25."Anderson"Hippolytus of Rome (170–235) may also have identified December 25 for the birth of Jesus and March 25 for the conception."CathChrit"T.C. Schmidt, Hippolytus of Rome: Commentary on Daniel (CreateSpace 2010 ISBN 1453795634) 4 23.3 and  (Chronicron.net 1st Ed. 2010) 4.23.3.  Sextus Julius Africanus (c. 160–c. 240) identified December 25, later to become the most widely accepted date of celebration, as the date of Jesus' birth in 221. The precise origin of assigning December 25 to the birth of Jesus is unclear."Britannica"Various dates were speculated: May 20, April 18 or 19, March 25, January 2, November 17 or 20."CathChrit"CoffmanWhen celebration on a particular date began, January 6 prevailed at least in the East; but, except among Armenians (the Armenian Apostolic Church and the Armenian Evangelical Church), who continue to celebrate the birth on January 6, December 25 eventually won acceptance everywhere.The New Testament Gospel of Luke may indirectly give the date as December for the birth of Jesus, with the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy with John the Baptist cited by John Chrysostom (c. 386) as a date for the Annunciation."CathChrit""bib-arch.org""Gibson"", ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2006. Tertullian (d. 220) did not mention Christmas as a major feast day in the Church of Roman Africa."CathChrit"In ''Chronographai'', a reference work published in 221, Sextus Julius Africanus suggested that Jesus was conceived on the spring equinox."", ''Encyclopædia Britannica'' Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, 2006.Roll, p. 79, 80. Only fragments of ''Chronographai'' survive. In one fragment, Africanus referred to "Pege in Bethlehem" and "Lady Pege, Spring-bearer." See "s:Ante-Nicene Fathers/Volume VI/Julius Africanus/Narrative of Events Happening in Persia on the Birth of Christ|Narrative Narrative of Events Happening in Persia on the Birth of Christ Narrative". The equinox was March 25 on the Roman calendar, so this implied a birth in December.Bradt, Hale, ''Astronomy Methods'', (2004), p. 69.Roll p. 87.The belief that God came into the world in the form of man to atone for the sins of humanity, rather than the exact birth date, is considered to be the primary purpose in celebrating Christmas.In the early 4th century, the church calendar in Rome contained Christmas on December 25 and other holidays placed on solar dates. According to HijmansHijmans, S.E., '','' 2009, p. 595. ISBN 978-90-367-3931-3  "It is cosmic symbolism ... which inspired the Church leadership in Rome to elect the southern solstice, December 25, as the birthday of Christ, and the northern solstice as that of John the Baptist, supplemented by the equinoxes as their respective dates of conception." UsenerHermann Usener, ''Das Weihnachtsfest'' (Part 1 of ''Religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen'', Second edition 1911; Verlag von Max Cohen ; Sohn, Bonn.  (Note that the first edition, 1889, doesn't have the discussion of Natalis Solis Invicti); also ''Sol Invictus'' (1905).) and others"Christmas"proposed that the Christians chose this day because it was the Roman feast celebrating the birthday of Sol Invictus.  Modern scholar S. E. Hijmans, however, states that "While they were aware that pagans called this day the 'birthday' of Sol Invictus, this did not concern them and it did not play any role in their choice of date for Christmas.""Hijmans"Around the year 386 John Chrysostom delivered a sermon in Antioch in favour of adopting December 25 celebration also in the East, since, he said, the conception of Jesus (31) had been announced during the sixth month of Elisabeth's pregnancy with John the Baptist (), which he dated from the duties Zacharias performed on the Day of Atonement during the seventh month of the Hebrew calendar Ethanim or Tishri (31, 31) which falls from late September to early October."CathChrit"That shepherds watched the flocks by night in the fields in the winter time is supported by the phrase "frost by night" in . A special group known as the shepherds of Migdal Eder (, 31) watched the flocks by night year round pastured for Temple Sacrifice near Bethlehem.Gibson, David J. (October – December 1965).[The Date of Christ's Birth]. Bible League Quarterly.Edersheim, Alfred (1883). The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah. Book II Chapter 6, p. 131.In the early 18th century, some scholars proposed alternative explanations. Isaac Newton argued that the date of Christmas, celebrating the birth of him whom Christians consider to be the "Sun of righteousness" prophesied in 31,"Newton"was selected to correspond with the southern solstice, which the Romans called ''bruma'', celebrated on December 25."", ''Seasonal Festivals of the Greeks and Romans''Pliny the Elder, Natural History,  In 1743, German Protestant Paul Ernst Jablonski argued Christmas was placed on December 25 to correspond with the Roman solar holiday ''Dies Natalis Solis Invicti'' and was therefore a "paganization" that debased the true church."SolInvictus"It has been argued that, on the contrary, the Emperor Aurelian, who in 274 instituted the holiday of the ''Dies Natalis Solis Invicti'', did so partly as an attempt to give a pagan significance to a date already important for Christians in Rome."Touchstone"In 1889, Louis Duchesne proposed that the date of Christmas was calculated as nine months after the Annunciation, the traditional date of the conception of Jesus.Roll, pp. 88–90.Duchesne, Louis, ''Les Origines du Culte Chrétien,'' Paris, 1902, 262 ff."bib-arch.org"Using the Julian calendarSome jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church, including those of Russia, Georgia, Ukraine, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Jerusalem, mark feasts using the older Julian calendar. As of , there is a difference of 13 days between the Julian calendar and the modern Gregorian calendar, which is used internationally for most secular purposes. As a result, December 25 on the Julian calendar currently corresponds to January 7 on the calendar used by most governments and people in everyday life. Therefore, the aforementioned Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the day that is internationally considered to be January 7.However, other Orthodox Christians, such as those belonging to the jurisdictions of Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, Albania, Cyprus, Finland, and the Orthodox Church in America, among others, began using the Revised Julian calendar in the early 20th century, which at present corresponds exactly to the Gregorian calendar.Therefore, these Orthodox Christians mark December 25 (and thus Christmas) on the same day that is internationally considered to be December 25, and which is also the date of Christmas among Western Christians.A further complication is added by the fact that the Armenian Apostolic Church continues the original ancient Eastern Christian practice of celebrating the birth of Christ not as a separate holiday, but on the same day as the celebration of his baptism (Theophany), which is on January 6. This is a public holiday in Armenia, and it is held on the same day that is internationally considered to be January 6, because the Armenian Church in Armenia uses the Gregorian calendar.However, there is also a small Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem, which maintains the traditional Armenian custom of celebrating the birth of Christ on the same day as Theophany (January 6), but uses the ''Julian'' calendar for the determination of that date. As a result, this church celebrates "Christmas" (more properly called Theophany) on the day that is considered January 19 on the Gregorian calendar in use by the majority of the world.In summary, there are four different dates used by different Christian groups to mark the birth of Christ, given in the table below.Listing{| class="wikitable"|-! Church or section! Date! Calendar! Gregorian date! Note|-| Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem| January 6| Julian calendar| January 19| Correspondence between Julian January 6 and Gregorian January 19 holds until 2100; in the following century the difference will be one day more.|-| Armenian Apostolic Church, Armenian Catholic Church| January 6| Gregorian calendar| January 6||-| Eastern Orthodox Church jurisdictions, including those of Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, Albania, Cyprus, and the Orthodox Church in America| December 25| Revised Julian calendar| December 25| Revised Julian calendar usage started in the early 20th century|-| Other Eastern Orthodox: Russia, Georgia, Ukraine, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia and Jerusalem.Also, some Byzantine Rite Catholics.| December 25| Julian calendar| January 7| Correspondence between Julian December 25 and Gregorian January 7 of the following year holds until 2099; from 2100 to 2199 the difference will be one day more.|-| Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria| Koiak 29 (corresponding to Julian December 25 or 26)| Coptic calendar| January 7 or 8| Since the Coptic calendar's leap day is inserted in what the Julian calendar considers September, the following Koiak 29 falls one day later than usual in the Julian and Gregorian calendars|-| Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church| Tahsas 29 or 28 (corresponding to Julian December 25)| Ethiopian Calendar| January 7| After the Ethiopian insertion of a leap day in what for the Julian calendar is September, Christmas is celebrated on Tahsas 28 in order to maintain the exact interval of 9 30-day months and 5 days of the child's gestation. The Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church uses the same calendar but, like the Coptic Church, does not make this adjustment.|-| Western Christian churches, Finnish Orthodox Church, secular world| December 25| Gregorian calendar| December 25||}EconomyEconomics of ChristmasChristmas market in Jena, GermanyChristmas market - Great Market Hall, BudapestChristmas is typically a peak selling season for retailers in many nations around the world. Sales increase dramatically as people purchase gifts, decorations, and supplies to celebrate. In the U.S., the "Christmas shopping season" starts as early as October.Varga, Melody. ["Black Friday], ''About:Retail Industry''.  In Canada, merchants begin advertising campaigns just before Halloween (October 31), and step up their marketing following Remembrance Day on November 11. In the UK and Ireland, the Christmas shopping season starts from mid November, around the time when high street Christmas lights are turned on. (Tuesday November 16, 2010) ''View London.co.uk''Julia Kollewe Monday (November 29, 2010)  ''The Guardian'' In the United States, it has been calculated that a quarter of all personal spending takes place during the Christmas/holiday shopping season. Figures from the U.S. Census Bureau reveal that expenditure in department stores nationwide rose from $20.8 billion in November 2004 to $31.9 billion in December 2004, an increase of 54 percent. In other sectors, the pre-Christmas increase in spending was even greater, there being a November–December buying surge of 100 percent in bookstores and 170 percent in jewelry stores. In the same year employment in American retail stores rose from 1.6 million to 1.8 million in the two months leading up to Christmas.US Census Bureau.  December 19, 2005. (accessed November 30, 2009)  Industries completely dependent on Christmas include Christmas cards, of which 1.9 billion are sent in the United States each year, and live Christmas Trees, of which 20.8 million were cut in the U.S. in 2002. In the UK in 2010, up to £8 billion was expected to be spent online at Christmas, approximately a quarter of total retail festive sales.garEach year (most notably 2000) money supply in US banks is increased for Christmas shopping.In most Western nations, Christmas Day is the least active day of the year for business and commerce; almost all retail, commercial and institutional businesses are closed, and almost all industries cease activity (more than any other day of the year), whether laws require such or not. In England and Wales, the Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 prevents all large shops from trading on Christmas Day. Scotland is currently planning similar legislation. Film studios release many high-budget movies during the holiday season (e.g. The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, Avatar), including Christmas films, fantasy movies or high-tone dramas with high production values to hopes of maximizing the chance of nominations for the Academy Awards.One economist's analysis calculates that, despite increased overall spending, Christmas is a deadweight loss under orthodox microeconomic theory, because of the effect of gift-giving. This loss is calculated as the difference between what the gift giver spent on the item and what the gift receiver would have paid for the item. It is estimated that in 2001, Christmas resulted in a $4 billion deadweight loss in the U.S. alone."The Deadweight Loss of Christmas", ''American Economic Review'', December 1993, '''83''' (5)["Is Santa a deadweight loss?"] ''The Economist'' December 20, 2001 Because of complicating factors, this analysis is sometimes used to discuss possible flaws in current microeconomic theory. Other deadweight losses include the effects of Christmas on the environment and the fact that material gifts are often perceived as white elephants, imposing cost for upkeep and storage and contributing to clutter.Reuters. ["Christmas is Damaging the Environment, Report Says"] December 16, 2005.ControversiesChristmas controversyChristmas has at times been the subject of controversy and attacks from various sources. A Puritan-led controversy began during the English Interregnum (1649–1660), when England was ruled by a Puritan Parliament. Puritans sought to remove the remaining pagan elements of Christmas. During this brief period, the Puritan-led English Parliament banned the celebration of Christmas entirely, considering it "a popish festival with no biblical justification", and a time of wasteful and immoral behavior.In Colonial America, the Puritans outlawed the celebration of Christmas in 1659. ''Time''. Retrieved December 25, 2011Some Christians and organizations such as Pat Robertson's American Center for Law ; Justice|American Center for Law and Justice cite alleged attacks on Christmas (dubbing them a "war on Christmas").[Christmas controversy article] – Muslim Canadian Congress. ["Jews for Christmas"]—NewsMax article One controversy is the occurrence of Christmas trees being renamed Holiday trees."MCC"In the United States there has been a tendency, in some contexts, to replace the greeting ''Merry Christmas'' with ''Happy Holidays'', which is considered inclusive at the time of the Jewish celebration of Hanukkah.[Don Feder on Christmas] – Jewish World review Groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union have initiated court cases to bar the display of images and other material referring to Christmas from public property, including schools.Gibson, John, ''The War on Christmas'', Sentinel Trade, 2006, pp. 1–6 Such groups argue that government-funded displays of Christmas imagery and traditions violate the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, which prohibits the establishment by Congress of a national religion.Ostling, Richard. "Have Yourself A Merry Little Lawsuit This Season." ''Buffalo Law Journal January 12, 2005, Vol. 77 Issue 96, p. 1-4. In 1984, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in ''Lynch v. Donnelly'' that a Christmas display (which included a Nativity scene) owned and displayed by the city of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, did not violate the First Amendment.[''Lynch vs. Donnelly''] (1984)In November 2009, the federal appeals court in Philadelphia endorsed a school district's ban on the singing of Christmas carols. The US Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal.Jeanette Rundquist:  ''The Huffington Post'', October 6, 2010. Retrieved September, 9 2012 In the private sphere also, it has been alleged that any specific mention of the term "Christmas" or its religious aspects was being increasingly censored, avoided, or discouraged by a number of advertisers and retailers. In response, the American Family Association and other groups have organized boycotts of individual retailers.In the United Kingdom there have been some minor controversies, one of the most famous being Birmingham City Council's temporary promotion of a Christmas-period festival as "Winterval" in 1997 and 1998."Winterval""Winterval" is a portmanteau of ''winter'' and ''festival'', and was the name for a 3-month period of festivities celebrating various religious and secular holidays, including Christmas. Critics attacked the use of the word "Winterval" as political correctness gone mad, accusing council officials of trying to take the Christ out of Christmas.[Winterval gets frosty reception] BBC. Retrieved December 25, 2011 The council responded to the criticism by stating that Christmas-related words and symbols were prominent in its publicity material."Winterval"Winterval was intended to attract business to the city centre, and was the collective name for all events, not a word used to replace Christmas.There were also protests in November 2009 when the city council of Dundee promoted its celebrations as the "Winter Night Light festival", initially with no specific Christmas references.See alsoChristianity* Christmas traditions* Christmas in July* Christmas Sunday* Little Christmas* Nochebuena* Mawlid* Twin Holy Birthdays* Yaldā winter festivalNotesReferences30emFurther reading30em** ''The Battle for Christmas'', by Stephen Nissenbaum (1996; New York: Vintage Books, 1997). ISBN 0-679-74038-4* '''', by Joseph F. Kelly (August 2004: Liturgical Press) ISBN 978-0-8146-2984-0* '''', by Clement A. Miles (1976: Dover Publications) ISBN 978-0-486-23354-3* ''The World Encyclopedia of Christmas'', by Gerry Bowler (October 2004: McClelland ; Stewart) ISBN 978-0-7710-1535-9* ''Santa Claus: A Biography'', by Gerry Bowler (November 2007: McClelland ; Stewart) ISBN 978-0-7710-1668-4* '''', by William J. Federer (December 2002: Amerisearch) ISBN 978-0-9653557-4-2* ''St. Nicholas: A Closer Look at Christmas'', by Jim Rosenthal (July 2006: Nelson Reference) ISBN 1-4185-0407-6* ''Just say Noel: A History of Christmas from the Nativity to the Nineties'', by David Comfort (November 1995: Fireside) ISBN 978-0-684-80057-8* ''4000 Years of Christmas: A Gift from the Ages'', by Earl W. Count (November 1997: Ulysses Press) ISBN 978-1-56975-087-2*External links** ''[Christmas: Its Origin and Associations]'', by William Francis Dawson, 1902, from Project Gutenberg