Cimbrian languageFile:Augusto 30aC - 6dC 55%CS jpg.JPG|right|thumb|300px|The Roman empire under Augustus (ruled 27 BC-14 AD), showing the location of the Cimbri in their original home in the northern part of the Jutland peninsula.The '''Cimbri''' were an ancient people, either Germanic or Celtic who, together with the Teutones and the Ambrones, fought the Roman Republic between 113 and 101 BC. The Cimbri were initially successful, particularly at the Battle of Arausio, in which a large Roman army was routed, after which they raided large areas in Gaul and Hispania. In 101 BC, during an attempted invasion of Italy, the Cimbri were decisively defeated by Gaius Marius, and their king, Boiorix, was killed. Some of the surviving captives are reported to have been among the rebelling Gladiators in the Third Servile War.Roman sources such as Strabo and Tacitus identify these Cimbri with a group living in Jutland, but strong evidence for this connection is lacking.HistoryOriginsArchaeologists have not found any clear indications of a mass migration from Jutland in the early Iron Age. The Gundestrup Cauldron, which was deposited in a bog in Himmerland in the 2nd or 1st century BC, shows that there was some sort of contact with southeastern Europe, but it is uncertain if this contact can be associated with the Cimbrian expedition.Kaul, F. ; Martens, J. "Southeast European Influences in the Early Iron Age of Southern Scandinavia. Gundestrup and the Cimbri", ''Acta Archaeologica'' 66 (1995) 111-161.Advocates for a northern homeland point to Greek and Roman sources that associate the Cimbri with the peninsula of Jutland, Denmark. According to the ''Res gestae'' (ch. 26) of Augustus, the Cimbri were still found in the area around the turn of the 1st century AD:The contemporary Greek geographer Strabo testifies that the Cimbri still existed as a Germanic tribe, presumably in the "Cimbric peninsula" (since they are said to live by the North Sea and to have paid tribute to Augustus):On the map of Ptolemy, the "Kimbroi" are placed on the northernmost part of the peninsula of Jutland.,Ptolemy, ''Geography'' 2.11.7:  "the Cimbri are more northern than all (of these tribes)" i.e. in the modern landscape of Himmerland south of Limfjorden (since Vendsyssel-Thy north of the fjord was at that time a group of islands). ''Himmerland'' (Old Danish ''Himbersysel'') is generally thought to preserve their name,Jan Katlev, ''Politikens etymologisk ordbog'', Copenhagen 2000:294; Kenneth W. Harl, ''Rome and the Barbarians'', The Teaching Company, 2004 in an older form without Grimm's law (PIE ''k'' ; Germ. ''h''). Alternatively, Latin ''C-'' represents an attempt to render the unfamiliar Proto-Germanic ''h'' = , perhaps due to Celtic-speaking interpreters (a Celtic intermediary would also explain why Germanic *''Þeuðanōz'' became Latin ''Teutones'').The origin of the name ''Cimbri'' is unknown. One etymologyVasmer, ''Russisches etymologisches Wörterbuch'', 1958, vol. 3, p. 62; Z. Gołąb, "About the connection between kinship terms and some ethnica in Slavic", ''International Journal of Slavic Linguistics and Poetics'' 25-26 (1982) 166-7. is PIE '''' "inhabitant", from '''' "home" (; Eng. ''home''), itself a derivation from '''' "live" (; Greek , Latin ''sinō''); then, the Germanic *''χimbra-'' finds an exact cognate in Slavic ''sębrъ'' "farmer" (; Croatian, Serbian ''sebar'', Russ. ''sjabër'').Because of the similarity of the names, the Cimbri have been at times associated with Cymry, the Welsh name for themselves.C. Rawlinson, "On the Ethnography of the Cimbri", ''Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland'' 6 (1877) 150-158. However, this word is derived from Brittonic *''Kombrogi'', meaning “compatriots”, and is unrelated to Cimbri.C.T. Onions and R.W. Burchfield,  eds. ''The Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology'', 1966, ''s.v.'' ''Cymry''; ''Webster's Third New International Dictionary''. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, 2002: 321 The name has also been related to the word ''kimme'' meaning “rim”, i.e. the people of the coast.[''Nordisk familjebok''], Projekt Runeborg Finally, since Antiquity, the name has been related to that of the Cimmerians.Posidonius in Strabo, ''Geography'' 7.2.2; Diodorus Siculus, ''Bibl.'' 5.32.4; Plutarch, ''Vit.Mar.'' 11.11.MigrationFile:Cimbrians and Teutons invasions.svg|thumb|300px|Journey of Cimbri and Teutones;brCimbri and Teuton defeats;brCimbri and Teuton victoriesSome time before 100 BC many of the Cimbri, as well as the Teutons and Ambrones migrated south-east. After several unsuccessful battles with the Boii and other Celtic tribes, they appeared ca 113 BC in Noricum, where they invaded the lands of one of Rome's allies, the Taurisci.On the request of the Roman consul Gnaeus Papirius Carbo, sent to defend the Taurisci, they retreated, only to find themselves deceived and attacked at the Battle of Noreia, where they defeated the Romans. Only a storm, which separated the combatants, saved the Roman forces from complete annihilation.Invading GaulNow the road to Italy was open, but they turned west towards Gaul. They came into frequent conflict with the Romans, who usually came out the losers. In Commentarii de Bello Gallico the Aduaticii—Belgians of Cimbrian origin—repeatedly sided with Rome's enemies. In 109 BC, they defeated a Roman army under the consul Marcus Junius Silanus, who was the commander of Gallia Narbonensis. In 107 BC they defeated another Roman army under the consul Gaius Cassius Longinus, who was killed at the Battle of Burdigala (modern day Bordeaux) against the Tigurini, who were allies of the Cimbri.Attacking the Roman RepublicIt was not until 105 BC that they planned an attack on the Roman Republic itself. At the Rhône River|Rhône, the Cimbri clashed with the Roman armies.  Discord between the Roman commanders, the proconsul Quintus Servilius Caepio and the consul Gnaeus Mallius Maximus, hindered Roman coordination and so the Cimbri succeeded in first defeating the legate Marcus Aurelius Scaurus and later inflicted a devastating defeat on Caepio and Maximus at the Battle of Arausio. The Romans lost as many as 80,000 men, according to Livy, Mommsen thought that excluded auxiliary cavalry and non-combatants who brought the total loss closer to 112,000. Other estimates are much smaller, but by any account a large Roman army was routed.Rome was in panic, and the ''terror cimbricus'' became proverbial. Everyone expected to soon see the ''new Gauls'' outside of the gates of Rome. Desperate measures were taken: contrary to the Roman constitution, Gaius Marius, who had defeated Jugurtha, was elected consul and supreme commander for five years in a row (104-100 BC).DefeatFile:The defeat of the Cimbri.jpg|right|thumb|''The Defeat of the Cimbri'' by Alexandre-Gabriel Decamps|Alexandre-Gabriel DécampsIn 103 BC, the Cimbri and their allies, the Teutons, had turned to the Iberian Peninsula where they pillaged far and wide. During this time C. Marius had the time to prepare and, in 102 BC, he was ready to meet the Teutons and the Ambrones at the Rhône. These two tribes intended to pass into Italy through the western passes, while the Cimbri and the Tigurines were to take the northern route across the Rhine and later across the Central Eastern Alps.At the estuary of the Isère River, the Teutons and the Ambrones met Marius, whose well-defended camp they did not manage to overrun. Instead, they pursued their route, and Marius followed them.  At Aquae Sextiae, the Romans won two battles and took the Teuton king Teutobod prisoner.The Cimbri had penetrated through the Alps into northern Italy. The consul Quintus Lutatius Catulus had not dared to fortify the passes, but instead he had retreated behind the River Po, and so the land was open to the invaders. The Cimbri did not hurry, and the victors of Aquae Sextiae had the time to arrive with reinforcements. At the Battle of Vercellae, at the confluence of the Sesia River with the Po River, in 101 BC, the long voyage of the Cimbri also came to an end.It was a devastating defeat, two chieftains, Lugius and Boiorix, died on the field, while the other chieftains Caesorix and Claodicus were captured. The women killed both themselves and their children in order to avoid slavery. The Cimbri were annihilated, although some may have survived to return to the homeland where a population with this name was residing in northern Jutland in the 1st century AD, according to the sources quoted above. Some of the surviving captives are reported to have been among the rebelling Gladiators in the Third Servile War.straussHowever, Justin's epitome of Trogus, 38.4, has Mithridates the Great state that the Cimbri are ravaging Italy while the Social War (91–88 BC)|Social War is going on, i.e. at some time in 90 - 88 BCE, thus more than a decade later,[Marcus Junianus Justinus, ''Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus'', 38.4], 'all Italy, at the present time, was in arms in the Marsian war,... At the same time, too, the Cimbri from Germany, many thousands of wild and savage people, had rushed upon Italy like a tempest', The Latin text has not like this translation an imperfect and a pluperfect, but two perfect infinitives (consurrexisse... inundasse...) after having sent ambassadors to the Cimbri to request military aid;[Marcus Junianus Justinus, ''Epitome of the Philippic History of Pompeius Trogus'', 38.3], 'In the next place, well understanding what a war he was provoking, he sent ambassadors to the Cimbri, the Gallograecians, the Sarmatians, and the Bastarnians, to request aid' judging from the context they must then have been living in North Eastern Europe at the time.DescendantsAccording to Julius Caesar, the Belgian tribe of the Atuatuci "was descended from the Cimbri and Teutoni, who, upon their march into our province and Italy, set down such of their stock and stuff as they could not drive or carry with them on the near (i.e. west) side of the Rhine, and left six thousand men of their company there as guard and garrison" (''Gall.'' 2.29, trans. Edwards). They founded the city of Atuatuca in the land of the Belgic Eburones, whom they dominated. Thus Ambiorix king of the Eburones paid tribute and gave his son and nephew as hostages to the Atuatuci (''Gall.'' 6.27). In the first century AD, the Eburones were replaced or absorbed by the Germanic Tungri, and the city was known as Atuatuca Tungrorum, i.e. the modern city of Tongeren.The population of modern-day Himmerland claims to be the heirs of the ancient Cimbri. The adventures of the Cimbri are described by the Danish Nobel Prize–winning author Johannes V. Jensen, himself born in Himmerland, in the novel ''Cimbrernes Tog'' (1922), included in the epic cycle ''Den lange Rejse'' (English ''The Long Journey'', 1923). The so-called Cimbrian bull ("Cimbrertyren"), a sculpture by Anders Bundgaard, was erected on 14 April, 1937 in a central town square in Aalborg, the capital of the region of North Jutland.A German ethnic minority speaking the Cimbrian language, having settled in the mountains between Vicenza, Verona, and Trento in Italy (also known as Seven Communities), is also called the ''Cimbri''. For hundreds of years this isolated population and its present 4,400 inhabitants have claimed to be the direct descendants of the Cimbri retreating to this area after the Roman victory over their tribe. However, it is more likely that Bavarians settled here in the Middle Ages. Most linguists remain committed to the hypothesis of a medieval (11th to 12th century AD) immigration to explain the presence of small German-speaking communities in the north of Italy.James R. Dow: ''Bruno Schweizer's commitment to the Langobardian thesis''. In: Thomas Stolz  (Hrsg): ''Kolloquium über Alte Sprachen und Sprachstufen. Beiträge zum Bremer Kolloquium über „Alte Sprachen und Sprachstufen“. (= Diversitas Linguarum, Volume 8)''. Verlag Brockmeyer, Bochum 2004, ISBN 3-8196-0664-5, S. 43–54. Some genetic studies seem to prove a Celtic, not Germanic, descent for most inhabitants in the region[National Center for Biotechnology Information, ''Haemochromatosis gene mutations in a clustered Italian population: evidence of high prevalence in people of Celtic ancestry''] that is reinforced by Gaulish toponyms such as those ending with the suffix ''-ago'' ; Celtic ''-*ako(n)'' (e.g. Asiago is clearly the same place name as the numerous variants - Azay, Aisy, Aze (disambiguation)|Azé, Ezy - in France, all of which derive from ''*Asiacum'' ; Gaulish ''*Asiāko(n)''). On the other hand, the original place names in the region, from the specifically localized language known as 'Cimbro' are still in use alongside the more modern names today. These indicate a different origin (e.g., Asiago is known also by its original Cimbro name of ''Sleghe''). The Cimbrian origin myth was popularized by humanists in the 14th century.Despite these connections to southern Germany, belief in a Himmerland origin persisted well into modern times.  On one occasion in 1709, for instance, Frederick IV of Denmark paid the region's inhabitants a visit and was greeted as their king. The population, which kept its independence during the time of the Venice Republic, was later severely devastated by World War I. As a result, many Cimbri have left this mountainous region of Italy, effectively forming a worldwide diaspora.CultureReligionGundestrup cauldron, Plate EStrabo gives this vivid description of the Cimbric folklore (''Geogr.'' 7.2.3, trans. H.L. Jones):The Cimbri are depicted as ferocious warriors who did not fear death. The host was followed by women and children on carts. Aged women, priestesses, dressed in white sacrificed the prisoners of war and sprinkled their blood, the nature of which allowed them to see what was to come.If the Cimbri did in fact come from Jutland, evidence that they practised ritualistic sacrifice may be found in the Haraldskær Woman discovered in Jutland in the year 1835.  Noosemarks and skin piercing were evident and she had been thrown into a bog rather than buried or cremated. Furthermore, the Gundestrup cauldron, found in Himmerland, may be a sacrificial vessel like the one described in Strabo's text. The work itself was of Thracian origin.LanguageA major problem in determining whether the Cimbri were speaking a Celtic or a Germanic language is that at this time the Greeks and Romans tended to refer to all groups to the north of their sphere of influence as Gauls, Celts, or Germani rather indiscriminately. Caesar seems to be one of the first authors to distinguish the two groups, and he had a political motive for doing so (it was an argument in favour of the Rhine border).A.A. Lund, ''Die ersten Germanen: Ethnizität und Ethnogenese'', Heidelberg 1998. Yet, one cannot always trust Caesar and Tacitus when they ascribe individuals and tribes to one or the other category, although Caesar made clear distinctions between the two cultures. Most ancient sources categorize the Cimbri as a Germanic tribe,Julius Caesar, ''Gallic Wars'' 1.33.3-4; Strabo, ''Geographica'' 4.4.3, 7.1.3; Pliny, ''Natural History'' 4.100; Tacitus, ''Germania'' 37, ''History'' 4.73. but some ancient authors include the Cimbri among the Celts.There are few direct testimonies to the language of the Cimbri: Referring to the Northern Ocean (the Baltic or the North Sea), Pliny the Elder states: "Philemon says that it is called Morimarusa, i.e. the Dead Sea, by the Cimbri, until the promontory of Rubea, and after that Cronium." The contemporary Gaulish terms for “sea” and “dead” appear to have been ''mori'' and ''*maruo-''; compare their well-attested modern Insular Celtic cognates ''muir'' and ''marbh'' (Irish), ''môr'' and ''marw'' (Welsh), and ''mor'' and ''marv'' (Breton).F. M. Ahl, "Amber, Avallon, and Apollo's Singing Swan", ''American Journal of Philology'' 103 (1982) 399. The same word for “sea” is also known from Germanic, but with an ''a'' (*''mari-''), whereas a cognate of ''marbh'' is unknown in all dialects of Germanic.Germanic has *''murþ(r)a'' "murder" (with the verb *''murþ(r)jan''), but uses *''daujan'' and *''dauða-'' for "die" and "dead". Yet, given that Pliny had not heard the word directly from a Cimbric informant, it cannot be ruled out that the word is in fact Gaulish instead.Accordingly, Pokorny, ''Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch'', 1959, p. 735, describes the word as "Gaulish?".The known Cimbri chiefs have names that look Celtic, including Boiorix (which may mean "King of the Boii" or, more literally, "King of Strikers"), Gaesorix (which means "Spear King"), and Lugius (which may be named after the Celtic god Lugus), although this may not mean that they are Celtic as the elements could work in Germanic (compare the name of the Vandalic king Gaiseric, which is likely identical to Gaesorix). Also, although the kings of the Cimbri and Teutones carry what look like Celtic names, the origin of a name need not say anything about the ethnicity or language of the individual carrying the name. Other evidence to the language of the Cimbri is circumstantial: thus, we are told that the Romans enlisted Gaulish Celts to act as spies in the Cimbri camp before the final showdown with the Roman army in 101 BC. Some take this as evidence in support of "the Celtic rather than the German theory".Jean Markale wrote that the Cimbri were associated with the Helvetii, and more especially with the indisputably Celtic Tigurini. These associations may link to a common ancestry, recalled from two hundred years previous, though they may not. Henri Hubert states ;;"All these names are Celtic, and they cannot be anything else". Some authors take a different perspective.Countering the argument of a Celtic origin is the literary evidence that the Cimbri originally came from northern Jutland,Ó hÓgáin, Dáithí. 'The Celts: A History'. Boydell Press, 2003. ISBN 0-85115-923-0, ISBN 978-0-85115-923-2. Length: 297 pages. Page 131an area with no Celtic placenames, instead only Germanic ones. This long-standing, well-known article on the languages can be found in almost any edition of ''Britannica''. This does not rule out Cimbric Gallicization during the period when they lived in Gaul"celtshistory". Boiorix, who may have a Celtic name if not a Celticized Germanic name, was king of the Cimbri after they moved away for their ancestral home of northern Jutland; Boiorix and his tribe lived around Celtic peoples during his era as J. B. Rives points out in his introduction to Tacitus's Germania (book) and moreover that the name Boiorix can work in Proto-Germanic as well as Celtic.RIVESPhysical appearancePlutarch wrote that the Cimbri were tall and light-blue eyed:‘‘The most prevalent conjecture was that they were some of the German peoples which extended as far as the northern ocean, a conjecture based on their great stature, their light-blue eyes, and the fact that the Germans call robbers Cimbri.’’See alsoAncient Germanic culture*List of Germanic tribes*Cimmerians*Sugambri*Zimmern Chronicle*Cimbrian language*Cimbri (modern)Notes2External links*