British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke formulated three prediction-related adages that are known as '''Clarke's three laws'''.FormulationThe three laws are sometimes formulated as follows:; Clarke's first law Clarke's first law: When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.; Clarke's second law Clarke's second law: The only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to venture a little way past them into the impossible.; Clarke's third law Clarke's third law: Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.OriginsClarke's first law was proposed by Clarke in the essay "Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination", in ''Profiles of the Future'' (1962)."'Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination'" in the collection ''Profiles of the Future: An Enquiry into the Limits of the Possible'' (1962, rev. 1973), pp. 14, 21, 36.The second law is offered as a simple observation in the same essay. Its status as Clarke's second law was conferred by others. In a 1973 revision of ''Profiles of the Future'', Clarke acknowledged the second law and proposed the third. "As three laws were good enough for Newton, I have modestly decided to stop there".The third law is the best known and most widely cited, and appears in Clarke's 1973 revision of "Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination". It echoes a statement in a 1942 story by Leigh Brackett: "Witchcraft to the ignorant, … simple science to the learned"."The Sorcerer of Rhiannon", ''Astounding'' February 1942, p. 39. An earlier example of this sentiment may be found in ''Wild Talents'' (1932) by the author Charles Fort, where he makes the statement: "...a performance that may some day be considered understandable, but that, in these primitive times, so transcends what is said to be the known that it is what I mean by magic."  Even earlier, Rider Haggard's novel ''She'' (1886) expresses the sentiment multiple times, such as in chapter 17: "Fear not, my Holly, I shall use no magic. Have I not told thee that there is no such thing as magic, though there is such a thing as understanding and applying the forces which are in Nature?"Proposed fourth lawA fourth law has been proposed for the canon, despite Clarke's declared intention of not going one better than Newton. Geoff Holder quotes: "For every expert, there is an equal and opposite expert."Variants of the third lawThe third law has inspired many snowclones and other variations:* Any sufficiently advanced act of benevolence is indistinguishable from malevolence.Rubin is referring to an earlier work of his:(referring to artificial intelligence)* GreyAny sufficiently advanced incompetence is indistinguishable from malice. (Grey's law)  (compare Hanlon's razor)* ClarkAny sufficiently advanced cluelessness is indistinguishable from malice. (Clark's law)* Any sufficiently advanced troll is indistinguishable from a genuine kook. (Morgan's maxim)* Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from a rigged demo.[Quote Details: James Klass: Any sufficiently advanced technology... - The Quotations Page;;]* Software tests that unexplainably pass or fail are indistinguishable from voodoo.A contrapositive of the third law is* Any technology distinguishable from magic is insufficiently advanced. (Gehm's corollary)The third law has been:* reversed for fictional universes involving magic: "Any sufficiently analyzed magic is indistinguishable from science!"[Girl Genius;;][Sufficiently Analyzed Magic – TV Tropes;;]* expanded for fictional universes focusing on science fiction: "Any technology, no matter how primitive, is magic to those who don't understand it."[Freefall 00255 November 12, 1999;;]* used to refer to unexplained archaeological finds and reconstructions of folk mysticism: "Any sufficiently ancient recovered wisdom or artifact is also indistinguishable from magic."See also* First contact (anthropology)* Futures studies* Niven's laws* Search for extraterrestrial intelligence* Three Laws of Robotics* Scientism, a fictional religionReferences30emExternal links