4 Elements (album)File:Fotothek df tg 0006472 Theosophie ^ Philosophie ^ Sonifikation ^ Musik.jpg|thumb|Segment of the macrocosm showing the elemental spheres of terra (earth), aqua (water), aer (air), and ignis (fire), Robert Fludd, 1617'''Classical elements''' typically refer to Ancient Greek concepts, such as those of Aristotle, similar to the modern states of matter: earth  (solid), water (liquid), air (gas) and fire (plasma). Classical elements are the simplest form of existence, of everything in existence. Many philosophies and worldviews believe in classical elements.Historians trace the evolution of modern theory of chemical elements, chemical compounds, and chemical substance mixtures, ;nowikito medieval and Greek models.Many concepts once thought to be analogous, such as the Chinese Wu Xing, are now understood more figuratively.AncientAncient classic element systemsIn classical thought, the four elements earth, water, air, and fire as proposed by Empedocles frequently occur; Aristotle added a fifth element or ''quintessence'' (after "quint" meaning "fifth") called aether in Ancient Greece, and ''akasha'' in India. The concept of the five elements formed a basis of analysis in both Hinduism and Buddhism. In Hinduism, particularly in an esoteric context, the four states-of-matter describe matter, and a fifth element describes that which was beyond the material world. Similar lists existed in ancient China and Japan. In Buddhism the four great elements, to which two others are sometimes added, are not viewed as substances, but as categories of sensory experience.EgyptClassical elements in EgyptA Greek text called the ''Kore Kosmou'' ("Virgin of the World") ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus (the name given by the Greeks to the Egyptian god Thoth), names the four elements fire, water, air, and earth. As described in this book:And Isis answer made: Of living things, my son, some are made friends with ''fire'', and some with ''water'', some with ''air'', and some with ''earth'', and some with two or three of these, and some with all. And, on the contrary, again some are made enemies of fire, and some of water, some of earth, and some of air, and some of two of them, and some of three, and some of all. For instance, son, the locust and all flies flee fire; the eagle and the hawk and all high-flying birds flee water; fish, air and earth; the snake avoids the open air. Whereas snakes and all creeping things love earth; all swimming things love water; winged things, air, of which they are the citizens; while those that fly still higher love the fire and have the habitat near it. Not that some of the animals as well do not love fire; for instance salamanders, for they even have their homes in it. It is because one or another of the elements doth form their bodies' outer envelope. Each soul, accordingly, while it is in its body is weighted and constricted by these four.;/blockquote;According to Galen, these elements were used by Hippocrates in describing the human body with an association with the four humours: yellow bile (fire), black bile (earth), blood (air), and phlegm (water).Cosmic elements in BabyloniaIn Babylonian mythology, the cosmogony called ''Enûma Eliš'', a text written between the 18th and 16th centuries BC, involves four gods that we might see as personified cosmic elements: sea, earth, sky, wind. In other Babylonian texts these phenomena are considered independent of their association with deities, though they are not treated as the component elements of the universe, as later in Empedocles.IndiaHinduismClassical elements in Hinduism;;The 5 Elements of NatureThe system of five elements are found in Vedas, especially Ayurveda, the ''pancha mahabhuta'', or "five great elements", of Hinduism are ''bhūmi'' (earth), ''ap'' or ''jala'' (water), ''tejas'' or ''agni'' (fire), ''marut'' or ''pavan'' (air or wind), ''vyom''; or ''shunya(zero)'' or ''akash'' (aether or void). They further suggest that all of creation, including the human body, is made up of these five essential elements and that upon death, the human body dissolves into these five elements of nature, thereby balancing the cycle of nature.The five elements are associated with the five senses, and act as the gross medium for the experience of sensations. The basest element, earth, created using all the other elements, can be perceived by all five senses– (i) hearing, (ii) touch, (iii) sight, (iv) taste, and (v) smell. The next higher element, water, has no odor but can be heard, felt, seen and tasted. Next comes fire, which can be heard, felt and seen. Air can be heard and felt. "Akasha" (aether) is the medium of sound but is inaccessible to all other senses.BuddhismBuddhist elementsIn the Pali literature, the ''mahabhuta'' ("great elements") or ''catudhatu'' ("four elements") are earth, water, fire and air.  In early Buddhism, the four elements are a basis for understanding suffering and for liberating oneself from suffering. The earliest Buddhist texts explain that the four primary material elements are the sensory qualities solidity, fluidity, temperature, and mobility; their characterization as earth, water, fire, and air, respectively, is declared an abstractioninstead of concentrating on the fact of material existence, one observes how a physical thing is sensed, felt, perceived.The Buddha's teaching regarding the four elements is to be understood as the base of all observation of real sensations rather than as a philosophy. The four properties are cohesion (water), solidity or inertia (earth), expansion or vibration (air) and heat or energy content (fire). He promulgated a categorization of mind and matter as composed of eight types of "kalapas" of which the four elements are primary and a secondary group of four are color, smell, taste, and nutriment which are derivative from the four primaries.Thanissaro Bhikkhu (1997) renders an extract of Shakyamuni Buddha's from Pali into English thus:Tibetan Buddhist medical literature speaks of the Panch Mahābhūta (five elements).ChinaChinese elementsWu XingThe Chinese had a somewhat different series of elements, namely Fire, Earth, Metal (literally gold), Water and Wood, which were understood as different types of energy in a state of constant interaction and flux with one another, rather than the Western notion of different kinds of material.Although it is usually translated as "element", the Chinese word ''xing'' literally means something like "changing states of being", "permutations" or "metamorphoses of being". In fact Sinologists cannot agree on any single translation. The Chinese elements were seen as ever changing and movingone translation of ''wu xing'' is simply "the five changes".The Wu Xing are chiefly an ancient mnemonic device for systems with five stages; hence the preferred translation of "movements", "phases" or "steps" over "elements."In the bagua, metal is associated with the divination figure 兌 ''Duì'' (☱, the lake or marsh: 澤/泽 ''zé'') and with 乾 ''Qián'' (☰, the sky or heavens: 天 ''tiān''). Wood is associated with 巽 ''Xùn'' (☴, the wind: 風/风 ''fēng'') and with 震 ''Zhèn'' (☳, the arousing/thunder: 雷 ''léi''). In view of the durability of meteoric iron, metal came to be associated with the aether, which is sometimes conflated with Stoic pneuma, as both terms originally referred to air (the former being higher, brighter, more fiery or celestial and the latter being merely warmer, and thus vital or biogenetic). In Taoism, ''qi'' functions similarly to pneuma in a prime matter (a basic principle of energetic transformation) that accounts for both biological and inanimate phenomena.In Chinese philosophy the universe consists of heaven and earth. The five major planets are associated with and even named after the elements: Jupiter 木星 is Wood (wikt:木#Han character|木), Mars 火星 is Fire (wikt:火#Han character|火), Saturn 土星 is Earth (wikt:土#Han character|土), Venus 金星 is Metal (wikt:金#Han character|金), and Mercury 水星 is Water (wikt:水#Han character|水). Also, the Moon represents Yin (wikt:陰#Han character|陰), and the Sun 太陽 represents Yang (wikt:陽#Han character|陽). Yin, Yang, and the five elements are associated with themes in the I Ching, the oldest of Chinese classical texts which describes an ancient system of cosmology and philosophy. The five elements also play an important part in Chinese astrology and the Chinese form of geomancy known as Feng shui.The doctrine of five phases describes two cycles of balance, a generating or creation (生, shēng) cycle and an overcoming or destruction (克/剋, kè) cycle of interactions between the phases.''Generating''* Wood feeds fire;* Fire creates earth (ash);* Earth bears metal;* Metal collects water;* Water nourishes wood.''Overcoming''* Wood parts earth;* Earth absorbs water;* Water quenches fire;* Fire melts metal;* Metal chops wood.There are also two cycles of imbalance, an overacting cycle (cheng) and an insulting cycle (wu).GreeceClassical elements in Greece;;{|align="center" class="toccolours" style="width:220px; float:center; margin:1em 1em 1em 1em;"| style="background:#c9b59d; text-align:center;" |'''Aristotelian elements and qualities'''|-| style="text-align:center;" |Four Classical Elements''Empedoclean elements''20px fire20px earth20px water20px air|};/div;The ancient Greek belief in five basic elements, these being earth (γῆ  ''ge''), water (ὕδωρ ''hudor''), air (ἀήρ ''aer''), fire (πῦρ ''pur'') and aether (αἰθήρ ''aither''), dates from pre-Socratic times and persisted throughout the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance, deeply influencing European thought and culture. These five elements are sometimes associated with the five platonic solids.Sicilian philosopher Empedocles (ca. 450 BC) proved (at least to his satisfaction) that air was a separate substance by observing that a bucket inverted in water did not become filled with water, a pocket of air remaining trapped inside.  Prior to Empodocles, Greek philosophers had debated which substance was the primordial element from which everything else was made; Heraclitus championed fire, Thales supported water, and Anaximenes plumped for air. Anaximander argued that the primordial substance was not any of the known substances, but could be transformed into them, and they into each other.  Empedocles was the first to propose four elements, fire, earth, air, and water.  He called them the four "roots" (ῥιζὤματα, rhizōmata).Plato seems to have been the first to use the term "element (στοιχεῖον, ''stoicheion'')" in reference to air, fire, earth, and water.  The ancient Greek word for element, ''stoicheion'' (from ''stoicheo'', "to line up") meant "smallest division (of a sun-dial), a syllable", as the composing unit of an alphabet it could denote a letter and the smallest unit from which a word is formed. A similar alphabetic metaphor may be the origin of the equivalent Latin word ''elementum'' (from which the English word comes), possibly based on the names of the letters 'l', 'm', and 'n', though the validity of this idea is debated.In his ''On Generation and Corruption'',τὸ μὲν γὰρ πῦρ θερμὸν καὶ ξηρόν, ὁ δ' ἀὴρ θερμὸν καὶ ὑγρόν (οἷον ἀτμὶς γὰρ ὁ ἀήρ), τὸ δ' ὕδωρ ψυχρὸν καὶ ὑγρόν, ἡ δὲ γῆ ψυχρὸν καὶ ξηρόν  Aristotle related each of the four elements to two of the four sensible qualities:* '''Fire''' is primarily hot and secondarily dry.* '''Air''' is primarily hot and secondarily wet (for air is like vapor, ἀτμὶς).* '''Water''' is primarily cold and secondarily wet.* '''Earth''' is primarily cold and secondarily dry.Jewish Kabbalistic schools characterize the four elements with the same characteristics, but with the secondary character of the lower element being the primary character of the next higher element, as follows:* '''Fire''' is primarily hot and secondarily dry.* '''Air''' is primarily wet and secondarily hot.* '''Water''' is primarily cold and secondarily wet.* '''Earth''' is primarily dry and secondarily cold.One classic diagram (above) has one square inscribed in the other, with the corners of one being the classical elements, and the corners of the other being the properties. The opposite corner is the opposite of these properties, "hot– cold" and "dry– wet".Aristotle added a fifth element, aether, as the quintessence, reasoning that whereas fire, earth, air, and water were earthly and corruptible, since no changes had been perceived in the heavenly regions, the stars cannot be made out of any of the four elements but must be made of a different, unchangeable, heavenly substance.;br style="clear:left;"The Neoplatonic philosopher, Proclus, rejected Aristotle's theory relating the elements to the sensible qualities hot, cold, wet, and dry.  He maintained that each of the elements has three properties. Fire is sharp, subtle, and mobile while its opposite, earth, is blunt, dense, and immobile; they are joined by the intermediate elements, air and water, in the following fashion:{|class="wikitable" style="text-align:center; width:240px; height:120px;"|-! Fire| style="background: pink" | Sharp ||  style="background: pink" | Subtle ||  style="background: pink" | Mobile|-! Air| style="background: lightgreen" | Blunt ||  style="background: pink" | Subtle ||  style="background: pink" | Mobile|-! Water| style="background: lightgreen" | Blunt || style="background: lightgreen" | Dense ||  style="background: pink" | Mobile|-! Earth| style="background: lightgreen" | Blunt || style="background: lightgreen" | Dense || style="background: lightgreen" | Immobile|}Medieval alchemyElements in Medieval alchemyFile:Fotothek df tg 0007129 Theosophie ^ Alchemie.jpg|thumb|Seventeenth century alchemical emblem showing the four Classical elements in the corners of the image, alongside the tria prima on the central triangleThe elemental system used in Medieval alchemy was developed primarily by the Persian alchemist Jābir ibn Hayyān. His system consisted of the four classical elements of air, earth, fire, and water, in addition to two philosophical elements: sulphur, characterizing the principle of combustibility, "the stone which burns"; and mercury, characterizing the principle of metallic properties. They were seen by early alchemists as idealized expressions of irreducibile components of the universe and are of larger consideration within philosophical alchemy.The three metallic principles—sulphur to flammability or combustion, mercury to volatility and stability, and salt to solidity—became the ''tria prima'' of the Swiss alchemist Paracelsus. He reasoned that Aristotle’s four element theory appeared in bodies as three principles. Paracelsus saw these principles as fundamental and justified them by recourse to the description of how wood burns in fire. Mercury included the cohesive principle, so that when it left in smoke the wood fell apart. Smoke described the volatility (the mercurial principle), the heat-giving flames described flammability (sulphur), and the remnant ash described solidity (salt).TibetIn Bön or ancient Tibetan philosophy, the five elemental processes of earth, water, fire, air and space are the essential materials of all existent phenomena or aggregates.  The elemental processes form the basis of the calendar, astrology, medicine, psychology and are the foundation of the spiritual traditions of shamanism, tantra and Dzogchen.Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche states thatThe names of the elements are analogous to categorised experiential sensations of the natural world.  The names are symbolic and key to their inherent qualities and/or modes of action by analogy.  In Bön the elemental processes are fundamental metaphors for working with external, internal and secret energetic forces.  All five elemental processes in their essential purity are inherent in the mindstream and link the trikaya and are aspects of primordial energy. As Herbert V. Günther states:In the above block quote the trikaya is encoded as: dharmakaya "god"; sambhogakaya "temple" and nirmanakaya "house".JapanJapanese elementsFive elements (Japanese philosophy)Japanese traditions use a set of elements called the  (''godai'', literally "five great"). These five are earth, water, fire, wind/air, and void. These came from Indian Vastu shastra philosophy and Buddhist beliefs; in addition, the classical Chinese elements (, ''wu xing'') are also prominent in Japanese culture, especially to the influential Neo-Confucianists during the Edo period.* '''Earth''' represented things that were solid.* '''Water''' represented things that were liquid.* '''Fire''' represented things that destroy.* '''Air''' represented things that moved.* '''Void''' or '''Sky/Heaven''' represented things not of our everyday life.Western astrology and tarotElements in western astrology and tarotDivinatory tarotWestern astrology uses the four classical elements in connection with astrological charts and horoscopes. The twelve signs of the zodiac are divided into the four elements: Fire signs are Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, Earth signs are Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn, Air signs are Gemini, Libra and Aquarius, and Water signs are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.Modern Modern elementsChemical element#HistoryImage:neon orbitals.JPG|right|thumb|300px|The shapes of the first five atomic orbitals using color to depict the phase of the wave functionThe Aristotelian tradition and medieval Alchemy eventually gave rise to modern scientific theories and new taxonomies. By the time of Antoine Lavoisier, for example, a list of elements would no longer refer to classical elements., in , compiled by Carmen Giunta The classical elements correspond more closely to four of the states of matter: solid, liquid, gas and plasma.Modern science recognizes classes of elementary particles which have no substructure (or rather, particles that are not made of other particles) and composite particles having substructure (particles made of other particles).See alsoClassical elements*Alchemy*Classical elements in popular culture*Elemental (Renaissance alchemy)*Wu Xing|Five elements (Chinese ''wǔ xíng'')*Mahabhuta|Five elements (Hindu ''mahābhūta'') and Four elements (Buddhist ''mahābhūtāni'')*Five elements (Japanese ''godai'')*First principle (Pre-Socratic ''arche'' and Aristotelian substratum)*Qi|First principle (Chinese ''qì'' and Japanese ''ki'')*Overview of the fundamental interaction*First principle (Prima materia in Alchemy)*Periodic table of the elements (Modern science)*Philosopher's stone (Middle Ages and Renaissance alchemy)*Phlogiston theory (History of science)*Fundamental interaction (Quantum Mechanics)*State of matter*Table of correspondences (Magic and the occult)NotesReferences* Bertrand Russell. ''History of Western Philosophy'', Routledge, 1995 ISBN 0-415-07854-7.* Paul Strathern (2000). ''[Mendeleyev's Dream– the Quest for the Elements]''. New York: Berkley Books.External linksFour elements*[Section on 4 elements in Buddhism]*. www.sacred-texts.com for Ancient Egypt Elements