File:LIRR sampler electric and diesel services.jpg|thumb|The Long Island Rail Road operates electric and diesel service into New York City along with Metro-North Railroad and NJ Transit Rail.File:Lakeshore West GO Train Westbound.jpg|thumb|A GO Transit train on the Lakeshore West line in Toronto, Canada.A Z 20500 train from Paris's Réseau Express Régional|RER line D running an old "ZYCK" (now renamed "ZUCO") route towards MelunAuckland Transport AM class train'''Commuter rail''',  also called '''suburban rail''', is a passenger rail transport service that primarily operates between a city centre, and the middle to outer suburbs beyond 15km (10 miles) and commuter towns or other locations that draw large numbers of commuters — people who travel on a daily basis. Trains operate following a schedule, at speeds varying from 50 to 200km/h (30 to 125mph). Distance charges or zone pricing may be used.Non-English names include ''Treno suburbano'' in Italian, ''Cercanías'' in Spanish, ''Rodalies'' in Catalan, ''Proastiakos'' in Greek, ''S-Bahn'' in German (although ''Regionalbahn'' or stopping services occasionally also operate as commuter trains), ''Train de banlieue'' in French, ''Příměstský vlak'' or ''Esko'' in Czech, ''Elektrichka'' in Russian, ''Pociąg podmiejski '' in Polish and ''Pendeltåg'' in Sweden. The development of commuter rail services has become popular today, with the increased public awareness of congestion, dependence on fossil fuels, and other environmental issues, as well as the rising costs of owning, operating and parking automobiles.CharacteristicsFile:Mumbai Train.JPG|thumb|Mumbai Suburban Railway, the lifeline of Mumbai, carries more than 7.24 million commuters on a daily basisMost commuter (or suburban) trains are built to main line rail standards, differing from light rail or rapid transit (metro rail)  systems by:*being larger*providing more seating and less standing room, for the longer distances involved*having (in most cases) a lower frequency of service*having scheduled services (i.e. trains run at specific times rather than at specific intervals)*serving lower-density suburban areas, typically connecting suburbs to the city center*sharing track or right-of-way with intercity or freight trains*not fully grade separated (containing at-grade crossings with crossing gates)Train scheduleCompared to rapid transit (or metro rail), commuter/suburban rail has lower frequency, following a schedule rather than fixed intervals, and fewer stations spaced further apart. They primarily serve lower density suburban areas (non inner-city), and often share right-of-way with intercity or freight trains. Some services operate only during peak hours and others uses fewer departures during off peak hours and weekends. Average speeds are high, often 50km/h (30mph) or higher. These higher speeds better serve the longer distances involved. Some services include express services which skip some stations in order to run faster and separate longer distance riders from short-distance ones.The general range of commuter trains' distance varies between 15 and 200km (10 and 125 miles). Sometimes long distances can be explained by that the train runs between two or several cities (e.g. S-Bahn in the Ruhr area of Germany). Distances between stations may vary, but are usually much longer than those of urban rail systems. In city centers the train either has a terminal station or passes through the city centre with notably fewer station stops than those of urban rail systems. Toilets are often available on board trains and in stations.TrackTheir ability to coexist with freight or intercity services in the same right-of-way can drastically reduce system construction costs. However, frequently they are built with dedicated tracks within that right-of-way to prevent delays, especially where service densities have converged in the inner parts of the network.Most such trains run on the local standard gauge track. Some light rail systems may run on a narrower gauge. Examples of narrow gauge systems are found in Japan, Switzerland, in the Brisbane (Queensland Rail's City network) and Perth (Transperth) systems in Australia, in some commuter rail systems in Sweden, and on the Genoa-Casella line in Italy. Some countries, including Finland, India, Pakistan, Russia, Brazil and Sri Lanka, as well as San Francisco (BART) in the USA and Melbourne and Adelaide in Australia, use broad gauge track.Distinction between other modes of railMetroMetro rail or rapid transit usually covers a smaller inner-urban area ranging outwards to between 12km to 20km (or 8 to 14 miles), has a higher train frequency and runs on separate tracks (underground or elevated), whereas commuter rail often shares tracks, technology and the legal framework within mainline railway systems.However, the classification as a metro or rapid rail can be difficult as both may typically cover a metropolitan area exclusively, run on separate tracks in the centre, and often feature purpose-built rolling stock. The fact that the terminology is not standardised across countries (even across English-speaking countries) further complicates matters. This distinction is most easily made when there are two (or more) systems such as New York's subway and the LIRR, Metro-North along with PATH, Paris' Paris Métro|Métro and Réseau Express Régional|RER along with Transilien, London's tube lines of the Underground and the Overground, (future) Crossrail, Thameslink along with other commuter rail operators, Madrid's Metro and Cercanías, Barcelona's Metro and Rodalies, and Tokyo's subway and the JR lines along with various privately owned and operated commuter rail systems.S-Bahn/S-trainFile:S-Bahn Berlin Baureihe 481.jpg|right|thumb|S-Bahns, like the one in Berlin, are not considered commuter rail.In Germany the S-Bahn is considered as a train category of its own, and exists in many of the large cities and in some other areas. They can be divided into two major types. In Berlin, the S-Bahn systems do fulfill all considerations of a true metro system (despite the existence of U-Bahns as well) – the trains run on tracks that are entirely separated from other trains, they have most of their stations within highly populated urban areas, has short distances between stations, has high frequency departures (all day) at fixed minutes and uses tunnels. The main difference between the S-Bahn systems of Berlin compared to the U-Bahns of the same cities are most notable at major railroad stations, where their (track-separated) platforms are located parallel to common railroad platforms. Some S-Bahn lines do run a bit further out from the city centre, compared with U-Bahn.This type of S-train also exists in Copenhagen (where a metro system also exists) and in Vienna (where the S-Bahn and U-Bahn constitute a common system). In Hamburg and Copenhagen, other, diesel driven trains, do continue where the S-Bahn ends ("A-Bahn" in Hamburg area, and "L-tog" in Copenhagen). In both Berlin and Copenhagen a ring line (circle line) is run by S-trains through highly populated boroughs, but outside the city centre core. (In Copenhagen the circle isn't complete, due to the city's location by the sea.)The second type, found in the Ruhr area, has longer lines and lacks a separate track system, and the trains runs between cities rather than within a city, although cities like Dortmund, Essen, Gelsenkirchen and Düsseldorf are almost agglomerated together. This type of S-Bahn also applies to Munich and Frankfurt. S-Bahns does also exist in some mid-size cities like Rostock and Magdeburg, but in that case the S-trains do not depart as often as metro systems do, the tracks are not separated from other trains and the number of lines are few. The distances between stations however are usually short.S-trains (S-Bahns) are a rather wide concept but only in a number of cases can they be truly considered as commuter rail. The consideration for this is open to subjective thoughts and different opinions however, especially since such S-trains only exists in a few countries (Germany, Austria, Denmark, Italy and Romania) and do differ from city to city even within these countries.Regional railRegional rail usually provides rail services between towns and cities, rather than purely linking major population hubs in the way inter-city rail does. Regional rail operates outside major cities. Unlike Inter-city, it stops at most or all stations between cities. It provides a service between smaller communities along the line, and also connections with long-distance services at interchange stations located at junctions or at larger towns along the line. Alternative names are "local train" or "stopping train". Examples include the former BR's Regional Railways, France's Transport express régional|TER (''Transport express régional''), Germany's DB Regio and South Korea's Tonggeun services.Regional rail does not exist in this sense in the United States, so the term "regional rail" has become synonymous with commuter rail there, although the two are more clearly defined in Europe.Inter-city railInter-city railIn some European countries the distinction between commuter trains and long-distance/intercity trains is very hard to make, because of the relatively short distances involved. For example, so-called "intercity" trains in Belgium and the Netherlands carry many commuters and their equipment, range and speeds are similar to those of commuter trains in some larger countries. In the United Kingdom there is no real division of organisation and brand name between commuter, regional and inter-city trains, making it hard to categorize train connections.Russian commuter trains, on the other hand, frequently cover areas larger than Belgium itself, although these are still short distances by Russian standards. They have a different ticketing system from long-distance trains, and in major cities they often operate from a separate section of the train station.The easiest way to identify these "inter-city" services is that they tend to operate as express services - only linking the main stations in the cities they link, not stopping at any other stations. However, this term is used in Australia (Sydney for example) to describe the regional trains operating beyond the boundaries of the suburban services, even though some of these "inter-city" services stop all stations similar to German regional services. In this regard, the German service delineations and corresponding naming conventions are clearer and better used for academic purposes.High-speed railSometimes high-speed rail can serve daily use of commuters. The Japanese Shinkansen high speed rail system is heavily used by commuters in the Greater Tokyo Area. They commute between 100 and 200km by Shinkansen. To meet the demand of commuters, JR sells commuter discount passes and operates 16-car bilevel E4 Series Shinkansen trains at rush hour, providing a capacity of 1,600 seats. Several lines in China such as the Beijing–Tianjin Intercity Railway, and the Shanghai–Nanjing High-Speed Railway, serve a similar role with many more under construction or planned.The high-speed services linking Zürich, Bern and Basel in Switzerland () have brought the Central Business Districts (CBDs) of these three cities within 1 hour of each other. This has resulted in unexpectedly high demand for new commuter trips between the three cities and a corresponding increase in suburban rail passengers accessing the high-speed services at the main city-centre stations (or Hauptbahnhof).The regional trains Stockholm–Uppsala, Stockholm–Västerås, Stockholm–Eskilstuna and Gothenburg–Trollhättan in Sweden reach  and have many daily commuters.Train typesCommuter/suburban trains are usually optimized for maximum passenger volume, in most cases without sacrificing too much comfort and luggage space, though they seldom have all the amenities of long-distance trains. Cars may be single- or double-level, and aim to provide seating for all. Compared to intercity trains, they have less space, fewer amenities and limited baggage areas.Multiple unit typeFile:Korail Class 361000 EMU.jpg|thumb|right|An electric multiple unit on the Gyeongchun Line operated by Korail in Seoul, South KoreaCommuter rail trains are usually composed of multiple units, which are self-propelled, bidirectional, articulated passenger rail cars with driving motors on each (or every other) bogie. Depending on local circumstances and tradition they may be powered either by diesel engines located below the passenger compartment (diesel multiple units) or by electricity picked up from third rails or overhead lines (electric multiple units). Multiple units are almost invariably equipped with control cabs at both ends, which is why such units are so frequently used to provide commuter services, due to the associated short turn-around time.Locomotive hauled servicesLocomotive hauled services are used in some countries or locations. This is often a case of asset sweating, by using a single large combined fleet for intercity and regional services. Loco hauled services are usually run in push-pull formation, that is, the train can run with the locomotive at the "front" or "rear" of the train (pushing or pulling). Trains are often equipped with a control cab at the other end of the train from the locomotive, allowing the train operator to operate the train from either end. The motive power for locomotive-hauled commuter trains may be either electric or Diesel-electric, although some countries, such as Germany and some of the former Soviet-bloc countries, also use diesel-hydraulic locomotives.Seat plansIn the USA and some other countries, a three-and-two seat plan is used. However, few people sit in the middle seat on these trains because they feel crowded and uncomfortable. It is said one industrial designer for one of New York City's commuter railroads, Metro-North, told people: "I designed the aisle seat with a half-back and no upholstery, so it will be very uncomfortable to sit there. They'll move in and take the center seat!" (This seating design can also be found on older NJ Transit and Long Island Rail Road rolling stock.)In Japan, longitudinal (sideways window-lining) seating is widely used in many commuter rail trains to increase capacity in rush hours. Carriages are usually not organized to increase seating capacity (although in some trains at least one carriage would feature more doors to facilitate easier boarding and alighting and bench seats so that they can be folded up during rush hour to provide more standing room) even in the case of commuting longer than 50km and commuters in the Greater Tokyo Area have to stand in the train for more than an hour.Commuter rail systems around the worldAfricaTemplate:Suburban railways in AfricaFile:Kalk Bay Station 3.jpg|thumb|A Metrorail train pulling out of Kalk Bay station in Cape Town.Currently there are not many examples of commuter rail in Africa. Metrorail operates in the major cities of South Africa, and there are some commuter rail services in Algeria, Kenya, Morocco, Alexandria, Egypt and Tunisia.In Algeria, SNTF operates commuter-rail lines between the capital Algiers and its southern and eastern suburbs. They also serve to connect Algiers' main universities to each other. The Dar es Salaam commuter rail offers intracity services in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.Asiaright|Yamanote Line which is representative of the Japanese commuter rail.Image:Jakarta Ekspress.JPG|thumb|right|Electric multiple unit of KRL Jabotabek or KAI Commuter Jabodetabek Yellow Line train at Gambir Station, JakartaIn Japan, commuter rail systems have extensive network and frequent service, and are heavily used. In many cases, Japanese commuter rail is operationally more like a typical metro system (with very high operating frequencies, an emphasis on standing passengers, short station spacing, and dedicated rights-of-way) than it is like commuter rail in other countries. Japanese commuter rail also tends to be heavily interlined with subway lines, with commuter rail trains continuing into the subway network, and then out onto different commuter rail systems on the other side of the city.  Many Japanese commuter systems operate several levels of express trains to reduce the travel time to distant locations, often using station bypass tracks instead of dedicated express tracks. It is notable that the majority of Japanese commuter rail systems are owned and operated by private railway companies, without public subsidy.In India, commuter rail systems are present in major cities. Mumbai Suburban Railway, the oldest suburban rail system in Asia, carries more than 7.24 million commuters on a daily basis which constitutes more than half of the total daily passenger capacity of the Indian Railways itself. The Chennai Suburban Railway along with MRTS is another railway of comparison where more than 1 million people travel daily to different areas in Chennai. In Hyderabad, the MMTS mainly transports people from the city centre to HI-TEC city, the city's Information Technology hub. Other commuter railways in India include Kolkata Suburban Railway which is the biggest Suburban Railway network in India covering 348 stations, Delhi Suburban Railway, Pune Suburban Railway and Lucknow-Kanpur Suburban Railway.Commuter trains are relatively uncommon in China, although systems have been inaugurated in some cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Zhengzhou, Wuhan and the entire Pearl River Delta. The level of service varies considerably from line to line ranging high to near high speeds. More developed and established lines such as the Guangzhou–Shenzhen Railway|Guangshen Railway have more metro-like service. Hong Kong MTR's East Rail Line and West Rail Line were built to commuter rail standards but are operated like a metro system.In Iran, SYSTRA has done a "Tehran long term urban rail study". SYSTRA proposed 4 express lines which are similar to Réseau Express Régional|RER suburban lines in Paris.Tehran Metro is going to construct express lines. For instance, the Rahyab Behineh, a consultant for Tehran Metro, is studying Tehran Express Line 2. Tehran Metro currently has a commuter line between Tehran and Karaj. Esfahan has two lines to its suburbs Baharestan and Fuladshahr under construction, and a third line to Shahinshahr is planned.In Taiwan, Western Line in Taipei-Taoyuan Metropolitan Area, Taichung Metropolitan Area, Tainan-Kaohsiung Metropolitan Area as well as Neiwan-Liujia Line in Hsinchu Area is considered commuter rail.Other examples in Asia include Seoul Metropolitan Subway of which some lines are suburban lines operated by Korail in South Korea, KTM Komuter in Malaysia, the Philippine National Railways orange line in Metro Manila, Philippines and KRL Jabotabek in Jakarta Metropolitan area, Indonesia.EuropeType X60 at Stockholm Central in SwedenMajor metropolitan areas in most European countries are usually served by extensive commuter/suburban rail systems. Well-known examples include Beovoz in Belgrade, Serbia, S-Bahn in Germany and German-speaking areas of Switzerland and Austria, Proastiakos in Greece, Réseau Express Régional|RER in France and Belgium, suburban lines in Milan (Italy), Cercanías in Spain, CP Urban Services in Portugal, HÉV in Budapest, Hungary and DART in Dublin, Ireland.In Russia, Ukraine and some other countries of the former Soviet Union, electrical multiple unit passenger suburban trains called Elektrichka are widespread.In Sweden, electrified commuter rail systems known as ''Pendeltåg'' are present in the cities of Stockholm and Gothenburg. The Stockholm commuter rail system, which began in 1968, is similar to the S-Bahn train systems of Munich and Frankfurt such that it may share railway tracks with inter-city trains and freight trains, but for the most part run on its own dedicated tracks, and that it is mainly used to transport passengers from nearby towns and other suburban areas into the city centre, not for transportation inside the city centre. The Gothenburg commuter rail system, which began in 1960, is similar to the Stockholm system, but does fully share tracks with long-distance trains. Other train systems that are also considered as commuter rail but not counted as ''pendeltåg'' include Roslagsbanan and Saltsjöbanan in Stockholm, Upptåget in Uppsala County and Skåne Commuter Rail (''Pågatågen'') in Skåne County which also acts as a regional rail system, as it serves other cities over 100km (62 miles) from the principal city of Malmö.North and Central AmericaCommuter rail in North AmericaMetrolink provides commuter rail service to 6 counties in Southern California.In the United States, Canada, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Mexico regional passenger rail services are provided by governmental or quasi-governmental agencies, with a limited number of metropolitan areas served.South AmericaFile:EMU CSR M20 en Barrancas.jpg|thumb|The Mitre Line is part of the extensive Buenos Aires metropolitan rail system.Examples include an  commuter system in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area, the  long Supervia in Rio de Janeiro, and the Metrotrén in Santiago, Chile. Another example is Companhia Paulista de Trens Metropolitanos (CPTM) in Greater São Paulo, Brazil. CPTM has 93 stations with six lines, numbered starting on 7 (the lines 1 to 6 belong to the São Paulo Metro), with a total length of km.OceaniaA Melbourne Siemens commuter trainMajor cities in Australia have suburban railway systems in their metropolitan areas. As with Japanese suburban railways or Germany's and Switzerland's S-Bahns, these Australian networks have far more frequent services and far higher ridership per capita than US 'commuter rail' in the usual sense of the term. To some US observers these networks may appear to operate as commuter/metro hybrids, however, they are simply the result of full utilisation of the available track capacity in the core of the suburban rail network, this being fed from multiple feeder lines. This is particularly so in Sydney and Melbourne, where headways on many lines in the core of the network reach 3–5 minutes in peaks and 10–20 minutes off peak (about 18 hours a day) and enter an underground loop for passenger distribution in the city centre; and where ridership per capita exceeds the sum of metro and commuter rail in comparable North American urban areas such as Toronto, Boston or the San Francisco Bay Area. All systems, however, are based on established main line rail systems, and track sharing with inter-city and freight services on parts of the network inhibit higher frequencies on some tracks. They are sometimes erroneously referred to as heavy rail, a different mode of public transport.The main systems of commuter rail in Australia include:*Sydney Trains in Sydney*Metro Trains Melbourne in Melbourne. ("Metro" in this case being an abbreviation of "metropolitan", to distinguish these services from regional trains under the V/Line brand.)*Queensland Rail City network in Brisbane.*Transperth Trains in Perth.*Adelaide suburban railway in Adelaide.New Zealand has two commuter rail systems, one in 25,000 V ACAuckland and the other one in 1,500 V DC Wellington.See also*List of suburban and commuter rail systems*Public transport*Commuting*Cercanías, the commuter rail systems of Spain's major metropolitan areas*Commuter rail in the United Kingdom*Commuter rail in North America*Commuter rail in Australia*S-Bahn, the combined city center and suburban railway system metro in Austria, Germany, Switzerland and DenmarkReferencesExternal linksTransportCategory:Regional rail systems|*