Consonant (band)Not to be confused with the musical concept of consonanceFile:Latin alphabet Tt.svg|thumb|upright=.62|alt=T|The letter T, the most common consonant letter in English.In articulatory phonetics, a '''consonant''' is a speech sound that is articulated with complete or partial closure of the vocal tract. Examples are , pronounced with the lips; , pronounced with the front of the tongue; , pronounced with the back of the tongue; , pronounced in the throat;  and , pronounced by forcing air through a narrow channel (fricatives); and  and , which have air flowing through the nose (nasals). Contrasting with consonants are vowels.Since the number of possible sounds in all of the world's languages is much greater than the number of letters in any one alphabet, linguists have devised systems such as the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to assign a unique and unambiguous symbol to each attested consonant. In fact, the English alphabet has fewer consonant letters than English has consonant sounds, so digraphs like "ch", "sh", "th", and "zh" are used to extend the alphabet, and some letters and digraphs represent more than one consonant. For example, the sound spelled "th" in "this" is a different consonant than the "th" sound in "thin". (In the IPA they are transcribed  and , respectively.)TerminologyThe word ''consonant'' comes from Latin oblique stem ''cōnsonant-,'' from ''cōnsonāns (littera)''  "sounding-together (letter)", a calque of Greek σύμφωνον ''sýmphōnon'' (plural ''sýmphōna'').Robert K. Barnhart, ''ed.'', ''Chambers Dictionary of Etymology'', Previously published as ''The Barnhart Dictionary of Etymology'', originally ©1988 The H.W. Wilson Company; Edinburgh, reprinted 2001: Chambers Harrap Publishers Ltd., p. 210.Dionysius Thrax calls consonants ''sýmphōna'' "pronounced with" because they can only be pronounced with a vowel.Dionysius Thrax. τέχνη γραμματική (Art of Grammar), ::σύμφονα δὲ τὰ λοιπὰ ἑπτακαίδεκα· β γ δ ζ θ κ λ μ ν ξ π ρ σ τ φ χ ψ. σύμφοναι δὲ +λέγονται+, ὅτι αὐτὰ μὲν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ φωνὴν οὐκ ἔχει, συντασσόμενα δὲ μετὰ τῶν φωνηέντων φωνὴν ἀποτελεῖ.:The remaining seventeen are consonants: b, g, d, z, th, k, l, m, n, x, p, r, s, t, ph, ch, ps. They are called consonants because they do not have a sound on their own, but, when arranged with vowels, they produce a sound. He divides them into two subcategories: ''hēmíphōna'', semivowels ("half-pronounced"), which correspond to continuants, not semivowels,Dionysius Thrax::τούτων ἡμίφωνα μέν ἐστιν ὀκτώ· ζ ξ ψ λ μ ν ρ σ. ἡμίφωνα δὲ λέγεται, ὅτι παρ᾽ ὅσον ἧττον τῶν φωνηέντων εὔφωνα καθέστηκεν ἔν τε τοῖς μυγμοῖς καὶ σιγμοῖς.:Of these, eight are semivowels [half-pronounced]: z, x, ps, l, m, n, r, s. They are called semivowels, because, though a little weaker than the vowels, they are still harmonious [well-sounding] in their moaning and hissing. and ''áphōna'', mute or silent consonants ("unvoiced"), which correspond to stops, not voiceless consonants.Dionysius Thrax::ἄφωνα δέ ἐστιν ἐννέα· β γ δ κ π τ θ φ χ. ἄφωνα δὲ λέγεται, ὅτι μᾶλλον τῶν ἄλλων ἐστὶν κακόφωνα, ὥσπερ ἄφωνον λέγομεν τὸν τραγωιδὸν τὸν κακόφωνον.:Nine are silent [unpronounced]: b, g, d, k, p, t, th, ph, ch. They are called silent, because, more than the others, they are discordant [ill-sounding], just as we call the ill-sounding tragedy "silent".This description does not apply to some human languages, such as the Salishan languages, in which stops sometimes occur without vowels (see Nuxálk language|Nuxálk), and the modern conception of consonant does not require co-occurrence with vowels.LettersThe word '''consonant''' is also used to refer to a letter of an alphabet that denotes a consonant sound. The 21 consonant letters in the English alphabet are B, C, D, F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S, T, V, X, Z, and usually W and Y. The letter Y stands for the consonant  in ''yoke'', the vowel  in ''myth'', the vowel  in ''funny'', and the diphthong  in ''my''. W always represents a consonant except in combination with a vowel letter, as in ''growth'', ''raw'', and ''how'', and in a few loanwords from Welsh, like ''crwth'' or ''cwm''.In some other languages, such as Finnish, ''y'' only represents a vowel sound.Consonants versus vowelsConsonants and vowels correspond to distinct parts of a syllable: The most sonorous part of the syllable (that is, the part that's easiest to sing), called the ''syllabic peak'' or ''nucleus,'' is typically a vowel, while the less sonorous margins (called the ''onset'' and ''coda'') are typically consonants. Such syllables may be abbreviated CV, V, and CVC, where C stands for consonant and V stands for vowel. This can be argued to be the only pattern found in most of the world's languages, and perhaps the primary pattern in all of them. However, the distinction between consonant and vowel is not always clear cut: there are syllabic consonants and non-syllabic vowels in many of the world's languages.One blurry area is in segments variously called ''semivowels, semiconsonants,'' or ''glides''. On the one side, there are vowel-like segments that are not in themselves syllabic but that form diphthongs as part of the syllable nucleus, as the ''i'' in English ''boil'' . On the other, there are approximants that behave like consonants in forming onsets but are articulated very much like vowels, as the ''y'' in English ''yes'' . Some phonologists model these as both being the underlying vowel , so that the English word ''bit'' would phonemically be , ''beet'' would be , and ''yield'' would be phonemically . Likewise, ''foot'' would be , ''food'' would be , ''wood'' would be , and ''wooed'' would be . However, there is a (perhaps allophonic) difference in articulation between these segments, with the  in  ''yes'' and  ''yield'' and the  of  ''wooed'' having more constriction and a more definite place of articulation than the  in  ''boil'' or  ''bit'' or the  of  ''foot''.The other problematic area is that of syllabic consonants, segments articulated as consonants but occupying the nucleus of a syllable. This may be the case for words such as ''church'' in rhotic dialects of English, although phoneticians differ in whether they consider this to be a syllabic consonant, , or a rhotic vowel, : Some distinguish an approximant  that corresponds to a vowel , for ''rural'' as  or ; others see these as a single phoneme, .Other languages use fricative and often trilled segments as syllabic nuclei, as in Czech and several languages in Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China, including Mandarin Chinese. In Mandarin, they are historically allophones of , and spelled that way in Pinyin. Ladefoged and Maddieson call these "fricative vowels" and say that "they can usually be thought of as syllabic fricatives that are allophones of vowels." That is, phonetically they are consonants, but phonemically they behave as vowels.Many Slavic languages allow the trill  and the lateral  as syllabic nuclei (see Words without vowels). In languages like Nuxálk language|Nuxalk, it is difficult to know what the nucleus of a syllable is, or if all syllables even have nuclei. If the concept of 'syllable' applies in Nuxalk, there are syllabic consonants in words like  (?) 'seal fat'. Miyako in Japan is similar, with  'to build' and  'to pull'.FeaturesEach spoken consonant can be distinguished by several phonetic ''features'':* The manner of articulation is how air escapes from the vocal tract when the consonant or approximant (vowel-like) sound is made. Manners include stops, fricatives, and nasals.* The place of articulation is where in the vocal tract the obstruction of the consonant occurs, and which speech organs are involved. Places include bilabial (both lips), alveolar (tongue against the gum ridge), and velar (tongue against soft palate). In addition, there may be a simultaneous narrowing at another place of articulation, such as palatalisation or pharyngealisation.* The phonation of a consonant is how the vocal cords vibrate during the articulation. When the vocal cords vibrate fully, the consonant is called voiced; when they do not vibrate at all, it is voiceless.* The voice onset time (VOT) indicates the timing of the phonation. Aspiration is a feature of VOT.* The airstream mechanism is how the air moving through the vocal tract is powered. Most languages have exclusively pulmonic egressive consonants, which use the lungs and diaphragm, but ejectives, clicks, and implosives use different mechanisms.* The length is how long the obstruction of a consonant lasts. This feature is borderline distinctive in English, as in "wholly"  vs. "holy" , but cases are limited to morpheme boundaries. Unrelated roots are differentiated in various languages such as Italian, Japanese, and Finnish, with two length levels, "single" and "geminate". Estonian and some Sami languages have three phonemic lengths: short, geminate, and long geminate, although the distinction between the geminate and overlong geminate includes suprasegmental features.* The articulatory force is how much muscular energy is involved. This has been proposed many times, but no distinction relying exclusively on force has ever been demonstrated.All English consonants can be classified by a combination of these features, such as "voiceless alveolar stop" . In this case, the airstream mechanism is omitted.Some pairs of consonants like ''p::b'', ''t::d'' are sometimes called fortis and lenis, but this is a phonological rather than phonetic distinction.Consonants are scheduled by their features in a number of IPA charts:ExamplesThe recently extinct Ubykh language had only 2 or 3 vowels but 84 consonants;Georges Dumézil and Tevfik Esenç, 1975, ''Le verbe oubykh: études descriptives et comparatives''. Adrien Maisonneuve: Paris. the Taa language has 87 consonants under one analysis, 164 under another, plus some 30 vowels and tone.Naumann, Christfied (2008). "The Consonantal System of West !Xoon". ''3rd International Symposium on Khoisan Languages and Linguistics''. Riezlern. The types of consonants used in various languages are by no means universal. For instance, nearly all Australian languages lack fricatives; a large percentage of the world's languages lack voiced stops as phonemes such as , , and . Most languages, however, do include one or more fricatives, with  being the most common, and a liquid consonant or two, with  the most common. The approximant  is also widespread, and virtually all languages have one or more nasals, though a very few, such as the Central dialect of Rotokas, lack even these. This last language has the smallest number of consonants in the world, with just six.Most commonThe most common consonants around the world are the three voiceless stops , , , and the two nasals , . However, even these common five are not universal. Several languages in the vicinity of the Sahara Desert, including Arabic, lack . Several languages of North America, such as Mohawk, lack both of the labials  and . The Wichita language of Oklahoma and some West African languages such as Ijo lack the consonant  on a phonemic level, but do use it as an allophone of another consonant (of  in the case of Ijo, and of  in Wichita). A few languages on Bougainville Island and around Puget Sound, such as Makah, lack both of the nasals  and . The 'click language' Nǁng language|Nǁng lacks ,Nǀu has a  instead. Hawaiian is often said to lack a , but it actually has a consonant that varies between  and . and colloquial Samoan lacks both alveolars,  and .Samoan words written with the letters ''t'' and ''n'' are pronounced with  and  except in formal speech. However, Samoan does have an alveolar consonant, . Despite the 80-odd consonants of Ubykh, it lacks the plain velar  in native words, as do the related Adyghe and Kabardian languages. But with a few striking exceptions, such as Xavante and Tahitian—which have no dorsal consonants whatsoever—nearly all other languages have at least one velar consonant: the few languages that do not have a simple  usually have a consonant that is very similar.The Niʻihau–Kauaʻi dialect of Hawaiian is often said to have no , but as in other dialects of Hawaiian it has a consonant that varies between  and , with  before  but  at the beginnings of words, though they are often in free variation. For instance, an areal feature of the Pacific Northwest coast is that historical * has become palatalized in many languages, so that Saanich for example has  and  but no plain ;[The World Atlas of Language Structures Online: Absence of Common Consonants] similarly, historical * in the Northwest Caucasian languages became palatalized to  in Ubykh and  in most Circassian dialects.The most ''frequent'' consonant (that is, the one appearing most often in speech) in many languages is .Audio samplesThe following are consonant charts with links to audio samples.; Audio templates violate wp:ACCESS as over-wide, JavaScript-based.--100%--;:* IPA chart pulmonic consonants with audio - (''requires browser with'' JavaScript):* IPA chart non-pulmonic consonants with audio - (''requires browser with'' JavaScript):* IPA chart affricate consonants with audio - (''requires browser with'' JavaScript):* IPA chart co-articulated consonants with audio - (''requires browser with'' JavaScript)See also*Articulatory phonetics*List of consonants*List of phonetics topics*Words without vowelsReferences2External links2005-07-20**[Consonants (Journal of West African Languages)]ReferencesIan Maddieson, ''Patterns of Sounds'', Cambridge University Press, 1984. ISBN 0-521-26536-3Category:Consonants|*