File:Tomahawk Block IV cruise missile.jpg|thumb|United States Tomahawk cruise missileFile:Taurus ILA2006.JPG|thumb|A modern Taurus KEPD 350 cruise missile of the LuftwaffeA '''cruise missile''' is a guided missile used against terrestrial targets, so called because the major portion of its flight path is conducted at cruise speed (i.e., approximately constant velocity). Cruise missiles are designed to deliver a large warhead over long distances with high accuracy (i.e. small circular error probability).  The dynamics of cruise are a result of aerodynamic lift (force), and the equality of the thrust or propulsion forces against aerodynamic drag and as a result there is no acceleration.  Modern cruise missiles are capable of travelling at supersonic or high subsonic speeds, are self-navigating, and are able to fly on a non-ballistic, extremely low-altitude trajectory. They are distinct from unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) in several ways: the cruise missile is a single use weapon which is always sacrificed in the mission; it is not intended to provide aerial reconnaissance; and the warhead is integrated directly into the hull of the vehicle and cannot be separated.The first cruise missiles to be deployed were the Nazi German V-1 of World War II. Advances in transistor and computer technology have contributed to self-correcting avionic and aeronautical designs that allow missiles to be guided in flight, as opposed to only at launch. These advances developed into guided missiles and guided bombs, and later into the modern cruise missile.HistoryA Fieseler Fi-103, the German V-1The idea of an "aerial torpedo" was shown in the British 1909 film ''The Airship Destroyer'', where flying torpedoes controlled wirelessly are used to bring down airships bombing London.In 1916, Lawrence Sperry built and patented an "aerial torpedo", a small biplane carrying a TNT charge, a Sperry autopilot and a barometric altitude control. Inspired by these experiments, the US Army developed a similar flying bomb called the Kettering Bug. Germany had also flown trials with remote-controlled aerial gliders (Torpedogleiter) built by Siemens-Schuckert beginning in 1916.Roger Branfill-Cook, "Torpedo", Seaforth Publishing, Great Britain 2014In the period between the World Wars the United Kingdom developed the Larynx (Long Range Gun with Lynx Engine) which underwent a few flight tests in the 1920s.[British Aerial Torpedoes]In the Soviet Union, Sergey Korolev headed the GIRD-06 cruise missile project from 1932 to 1939, which used a rocket-powered boost-glide bomb design. The 06/III (RP-216) and 06/IV (RP-212) contained gyroscopic guidance systems."Object No. 212", 1936 report in _Tvorcheskoi Nasledie Akedemika Sergeya Pavlovicha Koroleva_ The vehicle was designed to boost to 28km altitude and glide a distance of 280km, but test flights in 1934 and 1936 only reached an altitude of 500 meters.Germany first deployed cruise style missiles, during World War II. The V-1, often referred to as flying bomb, contained a gyroscope guidance system and was propelled by a simple pulse-jet engine, the sound of which gave it the nickname of "buzz bomb" or "doodlebug". Accuracy was sufficient only for use against very large targets (the general area of a city), while the range of 250km was significantly lower than that of a bomber carrying the same payload. The main advantages were speed (while not sufficient to outperform contemporary interceptors) and expendability. The production cost of a V-1 was only a small fraction of that of a V-2 supersonic ballistic missile, carrying a similar-sized warhead. Unlike the V-2, however, the initial deployments of the V-1 required stationary launch ramps which were susceptible to bombardment. Nazi Germany, in 1943, also developed the Mistel composite aircraft program which can be seen as a rudimentary air-launched cruise missile, where a piloted fighter-type aircraft was mounted atop an unpiloted bomber-sized aircraft that was packed with explosives to be released while approaching the target. Bomber-launched variants of the V-1 saw limited operational service towards the end of the war.Immediately after the war the United States Air Force had 21 different guided missile projects including would-be cruise missiles. All were cancelled by 1948 except four: the Air Material Command BANSHEE, the SM-62 Snark, the SM-64 Navaho, and the MGM-1 Matador. The BANSHEE design was similar to Operation Aphrodite; like Aphrodite it failed, and was canceled in April 1949. see PDF page 92During the Cold War period both the United States and the Soviet Union experimented further with the concept, deploying early cruise missiles from land, submarines and aircraft. The main outcome of the US Navy submarine missile project was the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile, based upon the V-1.The US Air Force's first operational surface-to-surface missile was the winged, mobile, nuclear-capable MGM-1 Matador, also similar in concept to the V-1. Deployment overseas began in 1954, first to West Germany and later to the Republic of China (Taiwan) and South Korea. On November 7, 1956, U.S. Air Force Matador units in West Germany, whose missiles were capable of striking targets in the Warsaw Pact, deployed from their fixed day-to-day sites to unannounced dispersed launch locations. This alert was in response to the crisis posed by the Soviet attack on Hungary which suppressed the 1956 Hungarian Revolution.Between 1957 and 1961 the United States followed an ambitious and well-funded program to develop a nuclear-powered cruise missile, Supersonic Low Altitude Missile. It was designed to fly below the enemy's radar at speeds above Mach 3 and carry a number of hydrogen bombs that it would drop on its path over enemy territory. Although the concept was proven sound and the 500 megawatt engine finished a successful test run in 1961, no airworthy device was ever completed. The project was finally abandoned in favor of ICBM development.While ballistic missiles were the preferred weapons for land targets, heavy nuclear and conventional weapon tipped cruise missiles were seen by the USSR as a primary weapon to destroy US naval carrier battle groups. Large submarines (for example, Echo and Oscar classes) were developed to carry these weapons and shadow US battle groups at sea, and large bombers (for example, Backfire, Bear, and Blackjack models) were equipped with the weapons in their air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) configuration.General designCruise missiles generally consist of a guidance system, payload, and aircraft propulsion system, housed in an airframe with small wings and empennage for flight control. Payloads usually consist of a conventional warhead or a nuclear warhead. Cruise missiles tend to be propelled by a jet engine, turbofan engines being preferred due to their greater efficiency at low altitude and subsonic speed.Guidance systemsMissile guidanceGuidance systems also vary greatly. Low-cost systems use a radar altimeter, barometric altimeter and clock to navigate a digital strip map. More advanced systems use inertial guidance, satellite guidance and terrain contour matching (TERCOM). Use of an automatic target recognition (ATR) algorithm/device in the guidance system increases accuracy of the missile. The Standoff Land Attack Missile features an ATR unit from General Electric.CategoriesCruise missiles can be categorized by size, speed (subsonic or supersonic), and range, and whether launched from land, air, surface ship, or submarine. Often versions of the same missile are produced for different launch platforms; sometimes air- and submarine-launched versions are a little lighter and smaller than land- and ship-launched versions.Guidance systems can vary across missiles. Some missiles can be fitted with any of a variety of navigation systems (Inertial navigation, TERCOM, or satellite navigation). Larger cruise missiles can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead, while smaller ones carry only conventional warheads.HypersonicA Hypersonic speed cruise missile would travel at least 5 times the speed of sound (Mach 5).*Shaurya (missile) IND hybrid propulsion missile, with characteristics of both cruise and ballistic missile.*BrahMos-II IND/RUS is a hypersonic missile currently under development in India and Russia.;DO NOT INCLUDE ANYTHING WHICH IS NOT A CRUISE MISSILE----;*The planned High Speed Strike Weapon US would be a hypersonic cruise missile.SupersonicFile:ASMP-A P1220887.jpg|thumb|upright|Air-Sol Moyenne Portée, a French supersonic cruise missileThese missiles travel faster than the speed of sound, usually using ramjet engines. The range is typically 100–500km, but can be greater. Guidance systems vary.;Please maintain list in alphabetical order----;Examples:*3M-54 Klub RUS Russia (the "Sizzler" variant is capable of supersonic speed)*Air-Sol Moyenne Portée FRA France - supersonic stand-off nuclear missile*BrahMos IND/RUS India / Russia - fastest  supersonic cruise missile*C-101 CHN China*C-301 CHN China*C-803 CHN China - supersonic terminal stage only*C-805 CHN China*CJ-10 CHN China*CVS401 Perseus UK/FRA United Kingdom / France (Under development) - stealth supersonic cruise missile*KD-88 CHN China*Kh-31 RUS Russia*P-270 Moskit USSR/RUS USSR / Russia*P-500 Bazalt USSR/RUS USSR / Russia*P-700 Granit USSR/RUS USSR / Russia*P-800 Oniks USSR/RUS USSR / Russia*YJ-12 CHN China*YJ-91 CHN China*Yun Feng ROC Taiwan*AGM-69 SRAM USA United StatesIntercontinental-range*SM-62 Snark USA United States*SM-64 Navaho USA United States*RSS-40 Buran USSR USSR*Burya USSR USSRLong-range subsonicright|A United States Air Force AGM-86The US, Russia, UK, Israel, South Korea, Turkey, Greece, Iran, China and India have developed several long-range subsonic cruise missiles. These missiles have a range of over mi and fly at about . They typically have a launch weight of about lb and can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead. Earlier versions of these missiles used inertial navigation; later versions use much more accurate TERCOM and DSMAC systems. Most recent versions can use satellite navigation.;Please maintain list in alphabetical order----;Examples:*AGM-86B USA US*AGM-129 ACM USA US*3M14 RUS Russia*Kh-101 RUS Russia*BGM-109 Tomahawk USA/UK US/UK*DH-10 CHN China*HSC-1 Makedon GRE Greece (1000 + km, Under development)*Hyunmoo III ROK South Korea (Hyunmoo IIIA 500km, Hyunmoo IIIB 1000km, Hyunmoo IIIC 1500km)*Meshkat IRN Iran (Range 2000km)*Nirbhay IND India (1000 + km)*Popeye Turbo SLCM ISR Israel*RK-55 SUN Soviet Union*SOM (missile) (SOM B Block I) TUR Turkey (350km range under serial production, 500km + range under development) - 500km, 1500km and 2500km versionsMedium-range subsonicFile:Storm Shadow p1220865.jpg|thumb|right|Storm Shadow (UK/France/Italy)A Pakistani Babur cruise missile launcherThese missiles are about the same size and weight and fly at similar speeds to the above category, but the range is (officially) less than 1,000km. Guidance systems vary.Examples:*Apache FRA*AGM-158 JASSM USA US*Popeye turbo ALCM ISR Israel*Babur PAK Pakistan*KD-63 CHN China*Ra'ad ALCM PAK Pakistan*Storm Shadow/SCALP UK/FRA/ITA UK / France / Italy*Raad IRN Iran*Taurus KEPD 350 DEU/SWE/SPA Germany / Sweden / SpainShort-range subsonicThese are subsonic missiles which weigh around 0 and have a range of up to .File:NSM PICT0001.JPG|thumb|right|A Naval Strike Missile of the Norwegian Navy;Please maintain list in alphabetical order----;Examples:*AVMT-300 BRA Brazil*C-801 CHN China*C-802 CHN China*C-602 CHN China*Delilah missile ISR Israel*Gabriel IV ISR Israel*Hae Sung ROK Korea*Kh-35 RUS Russia*P-15 KN-1 RUS Russia*Silkworm KN-1 CHN China*Nasr-1 IRN Iran*Naval Strike Missile NOR Norway*Noor IRN Iran*Qader IRN Iran*RBS-15 SWE Sweden*RGM-84 Harpoon USA USA*Silkworm CHN China*SOM (missile) TUR Turkey*Zafar IRN IranDeploymentFile:AGM-129A - 2006 0306 b52 2lg.jpg|thumb|right|AGM-129 ACM being secured on a B-52H bomberThe most common mission for cruise missiles is to attack relatively high-value targets such as ships, command bunkers, bridges and dams. Modern guidance systems permit precise attacks.(As of 2001) the BGM-109 Tomahawk missile model has become a significant part of the US naval arsenal. It gives ships and submarines an extremely accurate, long-range, conventional land attack weapon. Each costs about US$830,000.According to Prof Malcolm Charmers of defence think-tank the Royal United Services Institute Both the Tomahawk and the AGM-86 were used extensively during Operation Desert Storm.The US Air Force deploys an air-launched cruise missile, the AGM-86 ALCM. The B-52 Stratofortress is the exclusive delivery vehicle for the AGM-86 and AGM-129 ACM. Both missile types are configurable for either conventional or nuclear warheads.Both Tomahawk (as BGM-109) and ALCM (AGM-86) were competing designs for the USAF. ALCM nuclear tipped cruise missile to be carried by the B-52 heavy bomber.File:BRAHMOS Launcher.JPG|thumb|250px|left|Indian Army's BrahMos supersonic cruise missiles mounted on Mobile Autonomous Launchers (MAL).The USAF adopted the AGM-86 for its bomber fleet while AGM-109 was adapted to launch from trucks and ships and adopted by the USAF and Navy.The truck-launched versions, and also the Pershing II and SS-20 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, were later destroyed under the bilateral INF (Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces) treaty with the USSR.The British Royal Navy (RN) also operates cruise missiles, specifically the US-made Tomahawk, used by the RN's nuclear submarine fleet. UK conventional warhead versions were first fired in combat by the RN in 1999, during the Kosovo War (the US fired cruise missiles in 1991). The Royal Air Force uses the Storm Shadow cruise missile on its Tornado GR4 aircraft. It is also used by France, where it is known as SCALP EG, and carried by the Armée de l'Air's Mirage 2000 and Rafale aircraft.India and Russia have jointly developed the supersonic cruise missile BrahMos. There are three versions of the Brahmos: ship/land-launched, air-launched and sub-launched. The ship/land-launched version were operational as of late 2007. The Brahmos has the capability to attack targets on land. Russia also continues to operate other cruise missiles: the SS-N-12 Sandbox, SS-N-19 Shipwreck, SS-N-22 Sunburn and SS-N-25 Switchblade. Germany and Spain operate the Taurus missile while Pakistan has developed its own cruise missile somewhat similar to Tomahawk cruise missile, named the Babur missile. Both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have designed several cruise missile variants, such as the well-known C-802, some of which are capable of carrying biological, chemical, nuclear, and conventional warheads.Nuclear warhead versionsFranceThe French Force de Frappe nuclear forces include both land and sea based bombers with Air-Sol Moyenne Portée high speed medium range nuclear cruise missiles.  Two models are in use, ASMP and a newer ASMP-A.  Approximately 60 nuclear missiles are in service, 50 land based and 10 sea based.IndiaIn 2014, India successfully tested nuclear-capable long-range subsonic cruise missile ''Nirbhay''. The missile was developed by India's Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE), has a range of more than  and is expected to enter mass-production for the Indian Armed Forces by 2016.IsraelThe Israeli Defense Forces reportedly deploy the medium-range air-launched Popeye Turbo ALCM and the Popeye Turbo SLCM medium-long range cruise missile with nuclear warheads on Dolphin class submarines.PakistanPakistan currently has two nuclear-capable cruise missiles: the air-launched Ra'ad and the ground-launched, submarine-capable Babur. Both can carry nuclear warheads between 10 to 35 kt, and deliver them to targets at a range of  and  respectively. Ra'ad is in the use of Pakistan Air Force since 2007, while Babur is with the Pakistan Army since 2005.RussiaRussia has Kh-55SM cruise missiles, with similar to US AGM-129 range of 3000km, but are able to carry more powerful warhead of 200kt. They are equipped with a TERCOM system which allows them to cruise at an altitude lower than 110 meters at subsonic speeds while obtaining a CEP accuracy of 15 meters with an Inertial navigation system. They are air-launched from either Tupolev Tu-95s, Tupolev Tu-22Ms, or Tupolev Tu-160s, each able to carry 16 for the Tu-95, 12 for the Tu-160, and 4 for the Tu-22M. A stealth version of the missile, the Kh-101 is in development. It has similar qualities as the Kh-55, except that its range has been extended to 5,000km, equipped with a 1,000kg conventional warhead, and has stealth features which reduces its probability of intercept.United StatesUnited States and weapons of mass destructionFile:Agm-129 acm.jpg|thumb|right|An AGM-129 ACM of the United States Air ForceThe United States has deployed four nuclear cruise missiles at one time or another.*SSM-N-8 Regulus submarine-launched missile, out of service*AGM-86 ALCM air-launched cruise missile, 350 to 550 missiles and W80 warheads still in service*BGM-109 Tomahawk cruise missile in nuclear submarine-, surface ship-, and ground-launched models, nuclear models out of service but warheads kept in reserve.*AGM-129 ACM Advanced Cruise missile, out of serviceEfficiency in modern warfareCurrently cruise missiles are among the most expensive of single-use weapons, up to several million dollars apiece. One consequence of this is that its users face difficult choices in target allocation, to avoid expending the missiles on targets of low value. For instance during Operation Enduring Freedom the United States attacked targets of very low monetary value with cruise missiles, which led many to question the efficiency of the weapon. However, proponents of the cruise missile counter that the same argument applies to other types of UAVs: they are cheaper than human pilots when total training and infrastructure costs are taken into account, not to mention the risk of loss of personnel. As demonstrated in Operation Odyssey Dawn and prior conflicts, cruise missiles are much more difficult to detect and intercept than other aerial assets (reduced radar cross-section, infrared and visual signature due to smaller size), suiting them to attacks against static air defense systems.See also* Affordable Weapon System* Cruise missile submarine* Eugene Vielle (pioneer of technology that led to the Cruise missile)* Expendable launch system* Intercontinental ballistic missile* List of missiles* List of missiles by country* List of rocket planes* List of weapons* Low Cost Miniature Cruise Missile* NATO reporting name (has lists of various Soviet missiles)* Submarine-launched cruise missile* Surface-to-surface missile* Weapons of mass destructionReferences2External links*[The Evolution of the Cruise Missile by Werrell, Kenneth P.]**[An introduction to cruise missiles]From the website of the Federation of American Scientists (FAS)*[Feasibility of Third World Advanced Ballistic ; Cruise Missile Threat] NDIA 155 slide presentation from 1999*[The DIY cruise missile]*[The W80 Warhead]***[Bypassing the NMD: China and the Cruise Missile Proliferation Problem (Kh-55)]*[Video of cruise missile formation over Iraq]*