'''Cryptozoology''' is a pseudoscience involving the search for creatures whose existence has not been proven due to lack of evidence. The animals cryptozoologists study are referred to as ''cryptids'' by cryptozoologists. This includes living examples of creatures that are otherwise considered extinct, such as non-avian dinosaurs; animals whose existence lacks physical evidence but which appear in folklore, such as Bigfoot and chupacabras; and wild animals dramatically outside their normal geographic ranges, such as phantom cats.Cryptozoology is not a recognized branch of zoology nor a discipline of science."Simpson"It is an example of pseudoscience because it relies heavily upon anecdotal evidence, stories, and alleged sightings.While cryptozoology takes a pseudoscientific approach to creatures and beings from the folklore record, the academic study of folklore is folkloristics.Definitions, etymology, and terminologyIn his survey of the history of cryptozoology, academic Lorenzo Rossi says that defining the term ''cryptozoology'' has been controversial:Since its first appearance in the literature … both the word "cryptozoology" and its meaning have been the subject of heated discussions, so that hitherto a commonly accepted definition has yet to be found, and several authors have proposed a very personal vision of the discipline.Rossi, Lorenzo. 2015. "A Review of Cryptozoology: Towards a Scientific Approach to the Study of "Hidden Animals". In Angelici, Francesco M (Editor). ''Problematic Wildlife'', p. 573. Springer.;/blockquote;Attempts at defining the field were first made from 1982 to 1998 in ''Cryptozoology'', a peer-reviewed journal for the field. (Rossi himself defines ''cryptozoology'' as "a term that defines a branch of zoology thetis generally considered a pseudoscience devoted to the study of animal species whose existence is not supported by empirical evidence, but rather hypothesized via indirect or uncertain information, including oral traditions, eyewitness accounts, and inconclusive evidence".)"ROSSI-573"French-Belgian zoologist Bernard Heuvelmans, known as the "Father of Cryptozoology", coined the term ''cryptology'' from three elements, all from ancient Greek: ''Kryptos'' 'hidden', ''Zoon'' 'animal', and ''Logós'' 'discussion', yielding 'science of hidden animals'.Rossi, Lorenzo. 2015. "A Review of Cryptozoology: Towards a Scientific Approach to the Study of "Hidden Animals". In Angelici, Francesco M (Editor). ''Problematic Wildlife'', p. 573, 574-575. Springer. Heuvelmans later proposed the term ''crypto-zoology''—with hyphen— for the study of more 'supernatural' entities by cryptozoologists. However, this division never took hold in among cryptozoologists and academic Lorenzo Rossi says the 'supernatural' element "became the most common interpretation of cryptozoology among the general public, mostly thanks to the publication of commercial successful books on supernatural zoology …" and "hardly any further attempts were made to promote a more scientific approach to this field".Rossi, Lorenzo. 2015. "A Review of Cryptozoology: Towards a Scientific Approach to the Study of "Hidden Animals". In Angelici, Francesco M (Editor). ''Problematic Wildlife'', p. 575. Springer.Usage of the term ''cryptid'' in cryptozoology (specifically among members of International Society of Cryptozoology) was proposed by J.E. Wall in 1983 to replace the problematic terms "hidden animal" and "monster". The term is now universally used among cryptozoologists.Rossi, Lorenzo. 2015. "A Review of Cryptozoology: Towards a Scientific Approach to the Study of "Hidden Animals". In Angelici, Francesco M (Editor). ''Problematic Wildlife'', p. 577. Springer. The term is not used in zoology.Rossi, Lorenzo. 2015. "A Review of Cryptozoology: Towards a Scientific Approach to the Study of "Hidden Animals". In Angelici, Francesco M (Editor). ''Problematic Wildlife'', p. 579. Springer.OverviewHeuvelmans ''On the Track of Unknown Animals'' (1955) traces the scholarly origins of the discipline to Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans and his 1892 study, ''The Great Sea Serpent''. Heuvelmans argued that cryptozoology should be undertaken with scientific rigor, but with an open-minded, interdisciplinary approach. He also stressed that attention should be given to local, urban and folkloric sources regarding such creatures, arguing that while often layered in unlikely and fantastic elements, folktales can have grains of truth and important information regarding undiscovered organisms. Phantom cats (an example of living animals supposedly found outside their normal ranges) are a common subject of cryptozoological interest, largely due to the relative likelihood of existence in comparison to more fantastical cryptids lacking nearly any conclusive evidence of existence, such as Mothman.Another notable book on the subject is Willy Ley's ''Exotic Zoology'' (1959). Ley, best known for his writings on rocketry and related topics, was also trained in paleontology, and wrote a number of books about animals. Ley's collection ''Exotic Zoology'' is of some interest to cryptozoology, as he discusses the Yeti and sea serpents, as well as relict dinosaurs. The book entertains the possibility that some legendary creatures (like the sirrush, the unicorn, or the cyclops) might be based on actual animals, through misinterpretation of the animals and/or their remains. Also notable is the work of British zoologist and cryptozoologist Karl Shuker, who has published 12 books and countless articles on numerous cryptozoological subjects since the mid-1980s. Loren Coleman, a modern popularizer of cryptozoology, has chronicled the history and personalities of cryptozoology in his books.HallmarksList of cryptidsAn okapi at Walt Disney's Animal Kingdom, symbol of the defunct International Society of CryptozoologyMany species appear in cryptozoological literature, including mythical and folkloric animals, such as Bigfoot and lake monsters (including the Loch Ness Monster), which have appeared commonly as cultural references, and within TV, movies, and other media. A few extant species such as the okapi ;nowikiand mountain gorilla are also commonly used by cryptozoologists as examples of animals they say were previously thought to be cryptids, but are now known to exist.*Bigfoot is one of the most well known cryptids.*The Yeti.*The okapi, discovered in 1901, had been hinted at (but unseen) by Henry Morton Stanley in his travelogue of exploring the Congo. The okapi later became the emblem for the now defunct International Society of Cryptozoology.*Before 1912, the Komodo dragon was thought to be a mythological creature and was called the giant monitor.*The Hoan Kiem turtle.*The mountain gorilla.The 2003 discovery of the fossil remains of ''Homo floresiensis'' was cited by paleontologist Henry Gee, editor of the journal ''Nature'', as possible evidence that humanoid cryptids like the Orang Pendek and yeti were "founded on grains of truth." "Cryptozoology," Gee said, "the study of such fabulous creatures, can come in from the cold." While cryptozoologists are often unable to properly follow the scientific method due to the nature of their work, the vast majority still reject supernatural explanations for cryptid sightings, preferring to keep explanations as plausible as possible without ruling out the cryptid's existence.Reception and criticismCryptozoology has been criticised because of its reliance on anecdotal information and because some cryptozoologists do not follow the scientific method, devoting a substantial portion of their efforts to investigations of animals that most scientists believe are unlikely to have existed.In a 2011 forward for ''The American Biology Teacher'', then National Association of Biology Teachers president Dan Ward uses cryptozoology as an example of "technological pseudoscience" that may confuse students about the scientific method. Ward says that "Cryptozoology … is not valid science or even science at all. It is monster hunting."Ward, Daniel. 2011. “From the President”. The American Biology Teacher 73.8 (2011): 440–440. Historian of science Brian Regal includes an entry for cryptozoology in his ''Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia'' (2009). Regal says that "as an intellectual endeavor, cryptozoology has been studied as much as cryptozoologists have sought hidden animals".Nagel, Brian. 2009. ''Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia'', p. 50. ABC-CLIO.In a 1992 issue of ''Folklore'', folklorist Véronique Campion-Vincent says::Unexplained appearances of mystery animals are reported all over the world today. Beliefs in the existence of fabulous and supernatural animals are ubiquitous and timeless. In the continents discovered by Europe indigenous beliefs and tales have strongly influenced the perceptions of the conquered confronted by a new natural environment. In parallel with the growing importance of the scientific approach, these traditional mythical tales have been endowed with sometimes highly artificial precision and have given birth to contemporary legends solidly entrenched in their territories. The belief self-perpetuates today through multiple observations enhanced by the media and encouraged (largely with the aim of gain for touristic promotion) by the local population, often genuinely convinced of the reality of this profitable phenomenon."Campion-Vincent, Véronique. 1992. “Appearances of Beasts and Mystery-cats in France”. ''Folklore'' 103.2 (1992): 160–183.;/blockquote;Campion-Vincent says that "four currents can be distinguished in the study of mysterious animal appearances": "Forteans" ("compiler[s] of anomalies" such as via publications like the ''Fortean Times''), "occultists" (which she describes as related to "Forteans"), "folklorists", and "cryptozoologists". Regarding cryptozoologists, Campion-Vincent says that "this movement seems to deserve the appellation of parascience, like parapsychology: the same corpus is reviewed; many scientists participate, but for those who have an official status of university professor or researcher, the participation is a private hobby"."CAMPION-VINCENT-173"In her ''Encyclopedia of American Folklore'', academic Linda Watts says that "folklore concerning unreal animals or beings, sometimes called monsters, is a popular field of inquiry" and describes cryptozoology as an example of "American narrative traditions" that "feature many monsters".Watts, Linda S. 2007. ''Encyclopedia of American Folklore'', p. 271. Facts on File.Cryptozoologists contend that because species once considered superstition, hoaxes, delusions, or misidentifications were later accepted as legitimate by the scientific community,  descriptions and reports of folkloric creatures should be taken seriously.According to Mike Dash, few scientists doubt there are thousands of unknown animals, particularly invertebrates, awaiting discovery; however, cryptozoologists are largely uninterested in researching and cataloging newly discovered species of ants or beetles, instead focusing their efforts towards "more elusive" creatures that have often defied decades of work aimed at confirming their existence."luumsh"The majority of mainstream criticism of cryptozoology is thus directed towards the search for megafaunal cryptids such as Bigfoot, the Yeti, and the Loch Ness Monster, which appear often in popular culture, but for which there is little or no scientific support. Some scientists argue that megafaunal cryptids are unlikely to exist undetected in great enough numbers to maintain a breeding population and are unlikely to be able to survive in their reported habitats owing to issues of climate and food supply.Another criticism is that actual discoveries of new species have rarely, if ever, been predicted by cryptozoologists. Critics note that while other researchers have stumbled upon real animals, cryptozoologists have focused on finding legendary creatures with no success.See alsoCryptozoology;;*Cryptobotany*Teratology*List of cryptids*List of figures in cryptozoology*Lazarus taxon*Living fossil*''Journal of Scientific Exploration''*''Fortean Times Magazine''*''Paranormal Magazine''References2Further reading*Montgomery JG. ''WYRD- A Personal Journey Into the Beliefs and Philosophies of the Known and Unknown'' CFZ Press Devon 2014*Arment, Chad. ''Cryptozoology: Science ; Speculation''. Landisville, Penn.: Coachwhip, 2004, ISBN 1-930585-15-2.*Arnold, Neil. ''MONSTER! The A-Z Of Zooform Phenomena''. Bideford: CFZ Press, 2007, ISBN 1-905723-17-2.*Budd, Deena. '' The Weiser Field Guide to Cryptozoology ''. Redwheel, Weiser, 2010, ISBN 978-1-57863-450-7.* and at [Google Books].*Ley, Willy. ''Exotic Zoology'' ISBN 0-517-62545-8.*[North American BioFortean Review, Index to issues.]*Shuker, Karl. ''The Beasts That Hide from Man: Seeking the World's Last Undiscovered Animals''. New York: Paraview Press, 2003, ISBN 1-931044-64-3.External linkscryptozoologyCryptozoology*