CypherpunkFile:Gibson sprawl.jpg|thumb|right|William Gibson's Sprawl trilogy novels are famous early cyberpunk novels.'''Cyberpunk''' is a subgenre of science fiction in a future setting, noted for its focus on "high tech and low life;;" aspects of society.Anonymous. (2009). What is cyberpunk? ''Cyberpunked: Journal of Science, Technology, ;amp; Society''. Retrieved from It features advanced technology and science, such as information technology and cybernetics, coupled with a degree of breakdown or radical change in the social order.Cyberpunk plots often center on a conflict among artificial intelligences, and megacorporations, and tend to be set in a future Earth, rather than the far-future settings or galactic vistas found in novels such as Isaac Asimov's ''Foundation'' or Frank Herbert's ''Dune''. The settings are usually post-industrial dystopias but tend to be marked by extraordinary cultural ferment and the use of technology in ways never anticipated by its creators ("the street finds its own uses for things").Gibson, William from ''Burning Chrome'' published in 1981 Much of the genre's atmosphere echoes film noir, and written works in the genre often use techniques from detective fiction.Style and ethosPrimary exponents of the cyberpunk field include William Gibson, Neal Stephenson, Bruce Sterling, Bruce Bethke, Pat Cadigan, Rudy Rucker, and John Shirley.''Blade Runner'' can be seen as a quintessential example of the cyberpunk style and theme."Graham"Video games, board games, and tabletop role-playing games, such as ''Cyberpunk 2020'' and ''Shadowrun'', often feature storylines that are heavily influenced by cyberpunk writing and movies. Beginning in the early 1990s, some trends in fashion and music were also labeled as cyberpunk. Cyberpunk is also featured prominently in anime and manga:CWCcyber''Akira'', ''Gunnm'', ''Ghost in the Shell'', ''Serial Experiments Lain'', ''Dennou Coil'', ''Ergo Proxy'' and ''Psycho Pass'' being among the most notable.SettingFile:Shibuya Night (HDR).jpg|thumb|right|Shibuya, Tokyo.[Hidden Tokyo] Of Japan's influence on the genre, William Gibson said, "Modern Japan simply was cyberpunk."[How did Japan become the favored default setting for so many cyberpunk writers? ]Cyberpunk writers tend to use elements from hardboiled detective fiction, film noir, and postmodernist prose to describe the often nihilistic underground side of an electronic society. The genre's vision of a troubled future is often called the antithesis of the generally utopian visions of the future popular in the 1940s and 1950s. Gibson defined cyberpunk's antipathy towards utopian SF in his 1981 short story "The Gernsback Continuum," which pokes fun at and, to a certain extent, condemns utopian science fiction.In some cyberpunk writing, much of the action takes place online, in cyberspace, blurring the border between actual and virtual reality.[Cyberpunk 2021] A typical trope in such work is a direct connection between the human brain and computer systems. Cyberpunk settings are dystopias with corruption, computers and internet connectivity. Giant, multinational corporations have for the most part replaced governments as centers of political, economic, and even military power.The economic and technological state of Japan in the 80s influenced Cyberpunk literature at the time. Of Japan's influence on the genre, William Gibson said, "Modern Japan simply was cyberpunk.""cyberpunk1"Cyberpunk is often set in urbanized, artificial landscapes, and "city lights, receding" was used by Gibson as one of the genre's first metaphors for cyberspace and virtual reality.ProtagonistsOne of the cyberpunk genre's prototype characters is Case, from Gibson's ''Neuromancer''. Case is a "console cowboy," a brilliant hacker who has betrayed his organized criminal partners. Robbed of his talent through a crippling injury inflicted by the vengeful partners, Case unexpectedly receives a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to be healed by expert medical care but only if he participates in another criminal enterprise with a new crew.Like Case, many cyberpunk protagonists are manipulated, placed in situations where they have little or no choice, and although they might see things through, they do not necessarily come out any further ahead than they previously were. These anti-heroes—"criminals, outcasts, visionaries, dissenters and misfits"[FAQ file] (from the ''alt.cyberpunk'' Usenet group)—call to mind the private eye of detective fiction. This emphasis on the misfits and the malcontents is the "punk" component of cyberpunk.Society and governmentCyberpunk can be intended to disquiet readers and call them to action. It often expresses a sense of rebellion, suggesting that one could describe it as a type of culture revolution in science fiction. In the words of author and critic David Brin:...a closer look [at cyberpunk authors] reveals that they nearly always portray future societies in which governments have become wimpy and pathetic ...Popular science fiction tales by Gibson, Williams, Cadigan and others ''do'' depict Orwellian accumulations of power in the next century, but nearly always clutched in the secretive hands of a wealthy or corporate elite.Brin, David ''The Transparent Society'', Basic Books, 1998 [Book link];/blockquote;Cyberpunk stories have also been seen as fictional forecasts of the evolution of the Internet. The earliest descriptions of a global communications network came long before the World Wide Web entered popular awareness, though not before traditional science-fiction writers such as Arthur C. Clarke and some social commentators such as James Burke began predicting that such networks would eventually form.Clarke, Arthur C. "The Last Question," ''Science Fiction Quarterly'', 1956MediaLiteratureCyborgs in fictionThe science-fiction editor Gardner Dozois is generally acknowledged as the person who popularized the use of the term "cyberpunk" as a kind of literature , although Minnesota writer Bruce Bethke coined the term in 1980 for his short story "Cyberpunk," which was published in the November 1983 issue of ''Amazing Science Fiction Stories''.Bethke, Bruce. "Cyberpunk" ''Amazing Science Fiction Stories'', Vol. 57, No. 4; November 1983 [Link] The term was quickly appropriated as a label to be applied to the works of William Gibson, Bruce Sterling, Pat Cadigan and others. Of these, Sterling became the movement's chief ideologue, thanks to his fanzine ''Cheap Truth.'' John Shirley wrote articles on Sterling and Rucker's significance.John Shirley. ''Two Cyberpunks: Sterling and Rucker'' 1999 [Link] John Brunner's 1975 novel ''The Shockwave Rider'' is considered by many to be the first cyberpunk novel with many of the tropes commonly associated with the genre, some five years before the term was popularized by Dozois.William Gibson with his novel ''Neuromancer'' (1984) is likely the most famous writer connected with the term cyberpunk. He emphasized style, a fascination with surfaces, and atmosphere over traditional science-fiction tropes. Regarded as ground-breaking and sometimes as "the archetypal cyberpunk work,""Person"''Neuromancer'' was awarded the Hugo, Nebula, and Philip K. Dick Awards. ''Count Zero'' (1986) and ''Mona Lisa Overdrive'' (1988) followed after Gibson's popular debut novel. According to the Jargon File, "Gibson's near-total ignorance of computers and the present-day hacker culture enabled him to speculate about the role of computers and hackers in the future in ways hackers have since found both irritatingly naïve and tremendously stimulating."[Jargon File definition]Early on, cyberpunk was hailed as a radical departure from science-fiction standards and a new manifestation of vitality.Brians, Paul. “Study Guide for William Gibson: Neuromancer (1984)” Washington State University,  Shortly thereafter, however, some critics arose to challenge its status as a revolutionary movement. These critics said that the SF New Wave of the 1960s was much more innovative as far as narrative techniques and styles were concerned.James, Edward. ''Science Fiction in the 20th Century'', Oxford University Press, Oxford ; New York, 1994. p. 197 Furthermore, while ''Neuromancer'''s narrator may have had an unusual "voice" for science fiction, much older examples can be found: Gibson's narrative voice, for example, resembles that of an updated Raymond Chandler, as in his novel ''The Big Sleep'' (1939)."Brians"Others noted that almost all traits claimed to be uniquely cyberpunk could in fact be found in older writers' works—often citing J. G. Ballard, Philip K. Dick, Harlan Ellison, Stanisław Lem, Samuel R. Delany, and even William S. Burroughs."Brians"For example, Philip K. Dick's works contain recurring themes of social decay, artificial intelligence, paranoia, and blurred lines between objective and subjective realities, and the influential cyberpunk movie ''Blade Runner'' (1982) is based on his book, ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?''. Humans linked to machines are found in Pohl and Kornbluth's ''Wolfbane'' (1959) and Roger Zelazny's ''Creatures of Light and Darkness'' (1968).In 1994, scholar Brian Stonehill suggested that Thomas Pynchon's 1973 novel ''Gravity's Rainbow'' "not only curses but precurses what we now glibly dub cyberspace."Brian Stonehill, "[Pynchon's Prophecies of Cyberspace]." Delivered at the first international conference on Pynchon, the University of Warwick, England, November 1994. Other important predecessors include Alfred Bester's two most celebrated novels, ''The Demolished Man'' and ''The Stars My Destination'', as well as Vernor Vinge's novella ''True Names''.Reception and impactScience-fiction writer David Brin describes cyberpunk as "the finest free promotion campaign ever waged on behalf of science fiction." It may not have attracted the "real punks," but it did ensnare many new readers, and it provided the sort of movement that postmodern literary critics found alluring. Cyberpunk made science fiction more attractive to academics, argues Brin; in addition, it made science fiction more profitable to Hollywood and to the visual arts generally. Although the "self-important rhetoric and whines of persecution" on the part of cyberpunk fans were irritating at worst and humorous at best, Brin declares that the "rebels did shake things up. We owe them a debt."David Brin, [Review of ''The Matrix''].Fredric Jameson considers cyberpunk the "supreme literary expression if not of postmodernism, then of late capitalism itself".Cyberpunk further inspired many professional writers who were not among the "original" cyberpunks to incorporate cyberpunk ideas into their own works, such as George Alec Effinger's ''When Gravity Fails''. ''Wired'' magazine, created by Louis Rossetto and Jane Metcalfe, mixes new technology, art, literature, and current topics in order to interest today’s cyberpunk fans, which Paula Yoo claims "proves that hardcore hackers, multimedia junkies, cyberpunks and cellular freaks are poised to take over the world."Yoo, Paula. “CYBERPUNK—IN PRINT—HACKER GENERATION GETS PLUGGED INTO NEW MAGAZINE” Seattle Times. Seattle, Wash.: Feb 18, 1993. pg. G.3Film and televisionList of cyberpunk works#Television and Web SeriesFile:Blade Runner spinner flyby.png|thumb|320px|right|A futuristic Los Angeles in ''Blade Runner''.The film ''Blade Runner'' (1982)—adapted from Philip K. Dick's ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?''—is set in 2019 in a dystopian future in which manufactured beings called replicants are slaves used on space colonies and are legal prey on Earth to various bounty hunters who "retire" (kill) them. Although ''Blade Runner'' was largely unsuccessful in its first theatrical release, it found a viewership in the home video market and became a cult film. Since the movie omits the religious and mythical elements of Dick's original novel (e.g. empathy boxes and Wilbur Mercer), it falls more strictly within the cyberpunk genre than the novel does. William Gibson would later reveal that upon first viewing the film, he was surprised at how the look of this film matched his vision when he was working on ''Neuromancer''. The film's tone has since been the staple of many cyberpunk movies, such as ''The Matrix'' (1999), which uses a wide variety of cyberpunk elements.The number of films in the genre or at least using a few genre elements has grown steadily since ''Blade Runner''. Several of Philip K. Dick's works have been adapted to the silver screen. The films ''Johnny Mnemonic'' and ''New Rose Hotel'', both based upon short stories by William Gibson, flopped commercially and critically.In addition, "tech-noir" film as a hybrid genre, means a work of combining neo-noir and science fiction or cyberpunk. It includes many cyberpunk films such as ''Blade Runner'', ''Burst City'', ''The Terminator'', ''Robocop'', ''12 Monkeys'', ''The Lawnmower Man'', ''Hackers'', ''Hardware'', and ''Strange Days.''Anime and manga;;;;List of cyberpunk works#AnimationCyberpunk themes are widely visible in anime and manga. In Japan, where cosplay is popular and not only teenagers display such fashion styles, cyberpunk has been accepted and its influence is widespread. William Gibson’s ''Neuromancer,'' whose influence dominated the early cyberpunk movement, was also set in Chiba, one of Japan’s largest industrial areas, although at the time of writing the novel Gibson did not know the location of Chiba and had no idea how perfectly it fit his vision in some ways. The exposure to cyberpunk ideas and fiction in the mid 1980s has allowed it to seep into the Japanese culture.Cyberpunk anime and manga draw upon a futuristic vision which has elements in common with western science fiction and therefore have received wide international acceptance outside Japan. “The conceptualization involved in cyberpunk is more of forging ahead, looking at the new global culture. It is a culture that does not exist right now, so the Japanese concept of a cyberpunk future, seems just as valid as a Western one, especially as Western cyberpunk often incorporates many Japanese elements.”Ruh, Brian (2000), "[Liberating Cels: Forms of the Female in Japanese Cyberpunk Animation]." AnimeResearch.com December 2000. William Gibson is now a frequent visitor to Japan, and he came to see that many of his visions of Japan have become a reality:Modern Japan simply was cyberpunk. The Japanese themselves knew it and delighted in it. I remember my first glimpse of Shibuya, when one of the young Tokyo journalists who had taken me there, his face drenched with the light of a thousand media-suns—all that towering, animated crawl of commercial information—said, "You see? You see? It is ''Blade Runner'' town." And it was. It so evidently was.Gibson, William. "The Future Perfect: How Did Japan Become the Favored Default Setting for So Many Cyberpunk Writers?", ''Time International'', 30 April 2001:48.;/blockquote;Cyberpunk has influenced many anime and manga including the ground-breaking ''Akira'', ''Ghost in the Shell'', ''Ergo Proxy'', ''Battle Angel Alita'', ''Megazone 23'', ''Neo Tokyo'', ''Goku Midnight Eye'', ''Cyber City Oedo 808'', ''Bubblegum Crisis'', ''A.D. Police: Dead End City'', ''Angel Cop'', ''Kōji Morimoto|Extra'', ''Blame!'', ''Armitage III'', ''Texhnolyze'' and ''Psycho-Pass''.GamesList of cyberpunk works#Role-playing gamesThere are many cyberpunk video games. Popular series include the ''Metal Gear'' series, ''Megami Tensei'' series, ''Deus Ex'' series, ''Syndicate'' series, and ''System Shock'' and its sequel. Other games, like ''Blade Runner'', ''Ghost in the Shell'', and the ''Matrix'' series, are based upon genre movies, or role-playing games (for instance the various ''Shadowrun'' games). CD Projekt RED are currently developing a cyberpunk game, ''Cyberpunk 2077''.Several role-playing games (RPGs) called ''Cyberpunk'' exist: ''Cyberpunk'', ''Cyberpunk 2020'' and ''Cyberpunk v3'', by R. Talsorian Games, and ''GURPS Cyberpunk'', published by Steve Jackson Games as a module of the GURPS family of RPGs. ''Cyberpunk 2020'' was designed with the settings of William Gibson's writings in mind, and to some extent with his approval, unlike the approach taken by FASA in producing the transgenre ''Shadowrun'' game. Both are set in the near future, in a world where cybernetics are prominent. In addition, Iron Crown Enterprises released an RPG named ''Cyberspace'', which was out of print for several years until recently being re-released in online PDF form.In 1990, in a convergence of cyberpunk art and reality, the United States Secret Service raided Steve Jackson Games's headquarters and confiscated all their computers. This was allegedly because the ''GURPS Cyberpunk'' sourcebook could be used to perpetrate computer crime. That was, in fact, not the main reason for the raid, but after the event it was too late to correct the public's impression."[SJ Games Raided]", Jackson, Steve, Steve Jackson Games website, Friday 19 April 1990 Steve Jackson Games later won a lawsuit against the Secret Service, aided by the new Electronic Frontier Foundation. This event has achieved a sort of notoriety, which has extended to the book itself as well. All published editions of ''GURPS Cyberpunk'' have a tagline on the front cover, which reads "The book that was seized by the U.S. Secret Service!" Inside, the book provides a summary of the raid and its aftermath.Cyberpunk has also inspired several tabletop, miniature and board games such as ''Necromunda'' by Games Workshop. ''Netrunner'' is a collectible card game introduced in 1996, based on the ''Cyberpunk 2020'' role-playing game. ''Tokyo NOVA'', debuting in 1993, is a cyberpunk role-playing game that uses playing cards instead of dice.MusicList of cyberpunk works#MusicSome musicians and acts have been classified as cyberpunk due to their aesthetic style and musical content. Often dealing with dystopian visions of the future or biomechanical themes, some fit more squarely in the category than others. Bands whose music has been classified as cyberpunk include Psydoll, Front Line Assembly, Clock DVA and Sigue Sigue Sputnik. Some musicians not normally associated with cyberpunk have at times been inspired to create concept albums exploring such themes. Albums such as Gary Numan's Replicas, The Pleasure Principle and Telekon were heavily inspired by the works of Philip K. Dick. Kraftwerk's The Man-Machine and Computer World albums both explored the theme of humanity becoming dependent on technology. Nine Inch Nails' concept album Year Zero also fits into this category. Billy Idol's ''Cyberpunk'' drew heavily from cyberpunk literature and the cyberdelic counter culture in its creation. ''1. Outside'', a cyberpunk narrative fueled concept album by David Bowie, was warmly met by critics upon its release in 1995. Many musicians have also taken inspiration from specific cyberpunk works or authors, including Sonic Youth, whose albums Sister and Daydream Nation take influence from the works of Phillip K. Dick and William Gibson respectively.Vaporwave and Synthwave are also influenced by cyberpunk. The former has been interpreted as a dystopian critique of capitalism in the vein of cyberpunk and the latter as a nostalgic retrofuturistic revival of aspects of cyberpunk's origins.Furthermore, many dubstep producers, such as Machine Man and Ghosthack, have found inspiration in cyberpunk themes for their works.In 2013, electronic artist, synx, started a style of cyberpunk which blends mild edm and industrial with euphoric sounds and Japanese styled melodies.He released his "LET GO EP" in 2015 which further explores this style.Social impactArt and architectureright|Berlin's Sony CenterSome Neo-Futurism artworks and cityscapes have been influenced by cyberpunk, such as"cyberpunk1"the Sony Center in the Potsdamer Platz public square of Berlin, Germany, Cyberport in Hong Kong, and Shanghai.Sahr Johnny, "Cybercity - Sahr Johnny's Shanghai Dream" ''That's Shanghai'', October 2005; quoted online by .Society and countercultureSeveral subcultures have been inspired by cyberpunk fiction. These include the cyberdelic counter culture of the late 1980s and early 90s. Cyberdelic, whose adherents referred to themselves as "cyberpunks", attempted to blend the psychedelic art and drug movement with the technology of cyberculture. Early adherents included Timothy Leary, Mark Frauenfelder and R. U. Sirius. The movement largely faded following the dot-com bubble implosion of 2000.Cybergoth is a fashion and dance subculture which draws its inspiration from cyberpunk fiction, as well as rave and Gothic subcultures. In addition, a distinct cyberpunk fashion of its own has emerged in recent years which rejects the raver and goth influences of cybergoth, and draws inspiration from urban street fashion, "post apocalypse", functional clothing, high tech sports wear, tactical uniform and multifunction. This fashion goes by names like "tech wear", "goth ninja" or "tech ninja". Important designers in this type of fashion are ACRONYM, Demobaza, Boris Bidjan Saberi, Rick Owens and Alexander Wang.The Kowloon Walled City in Hong Kong (demolished in 1994) is often referenced as the model cyberpunk/dystopian slum as, given its poor living conditions at the time coupled by the city's political, physical, and economic isolation has caused many in academia to be fascinated by the ingenuity of its spawning.Related genresCyberpunk derivativesAs a wider variety of writers began to work with cyberpunk concepts, new subgenres of science fiction emerged, some which could be considered as playing off the cyberpunk label, others which could be considered as legitimate explorations into newer territory. These focused on technology and its social effects in different ways. One prominent subgenre is "steampunk," which is set in an alternate history Victorian era that combines anachronistic technology with cyberpunk's bleak film noir world view. The term was originally coined around 1987 as a joke to describe some of the novels of Tim Powers, James P. Blaylock, and K.W. Jeter, but by the time Gibson and Sterling entered the subgenre with their collaborative novel ''The Difference Engine'' the term was being used earnestly as well.Michael Berry, "Wacko Victorian Fantasy Follows 'Cyberpunk' Mold," ''The San Francisco Chronicle'', 25 June 1987; quoted online by [Wordspy].Another subgenre is "biopunk" (cyberpunk themes dominated by biotechnology) from the early 1990s, a derivative style building on biotechnology rather than informational technology. In these stories, people are changed in some way not by mechanical means, but by genetic manipulation. Paul Di Filippo is seen as the most prominent biopunk writer, including his half-serious ribofunk. Bruce Sterling's Shaper/Mechanist cycle is also seen as a major influence. In addition, some people consider works such as Neal Stephenson's ''The Diamond Age'' to be postcyberpunk.Cyberpunk works have been described as well-situated within postmodern literature.McHale, Brian (1991). "POSTcyberMODERNpunkISM." in Larry McCaffery, ed., ''Storming the Reality Studio: A Casebook of Cyberpunk and Postmodern Science Fiction''. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, pp. 308–323See alsoSpeculative fictionReferencesExternal links2006-01-11;;;;;;