BurundiTopography of Burundi'''Burundi''' is located in central Africa, to the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at the co-ordinates .Physical geographyBurundi occupies an area equal to km2  in size, of which km2 is land.  The country has km of land border: km of which is shared with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, km with Rwanda and km with Tanzania.  As a landlocked country, Burundi possesses no coastline. It straddles the crest of the Congo-Nile Divide which separates the basins of the Congo and Nile rivers. The farthest headwaters of the Nile, the Ruvyironza River, has its source in Burundi.ClimateBurundi in general has a tropical highland climate, with a considerable daily temperature range in many areas. Temperature also varies considerably from one region to another, chiefly as a result of differences in altitude. The central plateau enjoys pleasantly cool weather, with an average temperature of . The area around Lake Tanganyika is warmer, averaging ; the highest mountain areas are cooler, averaging . Bujumbura’s average annual temperature is . Rain is irregular, falling most heavily in the northwest. Dry seasons vary in length, and there are sometimes long periods of drought. However, four seasons can be distinguished: the long dry season (June–August), the short wet season (September–November), the short dry season (December–January), and the long wet season (February–May). Most of Burundi receives between  of rainfall a year. The Ruzizi Plain and the northeast receive betweenTerrainThe terrain of Burundi is hilly and mountainous, dropping to a plateau in the east.  The southern and eastern plains have been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as part of the Central Zambezian Miombo woodlands ecoregion.The lowest point in the country is at Lake Tanganyika, at m, with the highest point being on Mount Heha, at m.[Burundi, land and resources]  Natural hazards are posed in Burundi by flooding and landslides.Natural resourcesBurundi possesses reserves of: nickel, uranium, rare earth oxides, peat, cobalt, copper, platinum (not yet exploited), vanadium, niobium, tantalum, gold, tin, tungsten, kaolin, and limestone.  There is also arable land and the potential for hydropower.  Burundi has km2 of land that is irrigated.  The table below describes land use in Burundi.{| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center"|+Land use|-! Use !! Percentage of Area|-! arable land| 42.83|-! permanent crops| 13.63|-! other| 43.54|-|}Environment===Current issuesSoil erosion is an issue for Burundi, and is as a result of overgrazing and the expansion of agriculture into marginal lands.  Other issues include: deforestation, due to the uncontrolled cutting-down of trees for fuel; and habitat loss threatens wildlife populations.International agreementsBurundi is a party to the following international agreements that relate to the environment: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes and Ozone Layer Protection.  The following have been signed but not yet ratified by Burundi: Law of the Sea and Nuclear Test Ban.Extreme pointsThis is a list of the extreme points of Burundi, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.* Northernmost point - unnamed location on the border with Rwanda immediately south of the Rwandna town of Mbuye, Muyinga Province* Easternmost point - unnamed location on the border with Tanzania immediately northwest of Mburi hill, Cankuzo Province* Southernmost point - unnamed location on the border with Tanzania immediately north of the Tanzanian town of Mwenene, Makamba Province* Westernmost point - unnamed location on the border the Democratic Republic of the Congo immediately east of the Congolese town of Kamanyola, Cibitoke ProvinceReferences;referencesClimate ofBurundi