thumbBosnia and Herzegovina is located in Southeastern Europe, in the western Balkans. It has a 956km border with Croatia to the north and southwest, a 345km border with Serbia to the east, and a 425km border with Montenegro to the southeast. It borders the Adriatic Sea along its 20km (12.42mi) coastline.The most striking features of the local terrain are valleys and mountains which measure up to 2386 m in height. The country is mostly mountainous, encompassing the central Dinaric Alps. The northeastern parts reach into the Pannonian basin, while in the south it borders the Adriatic sea.The country's natural resources include: coal, iron ore, bauxite, manganese, nickel, clay, gypsum, salt, sand, timber and hydropowerRegionsThe country's name comes from the two regions Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have a very vaguely defined border between them. Bosnia occupies the northern areas which are roughly four fifths of the entire country, while Herzegovina occupies the rest in the south part of the country.The major cities are the capital Sarajevo, Banja Luka in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Bijeljina and Tuzla in the northeast, Zenica and Doboj in the central part of Bosnia and Mostar, the capital of Herzegovina.The south part of Bosnia has Mediterranean climate and a great deal of agriculture. Central Bosnia is the most mountainous part of Bosnia featuring prominent mountains Vlašić (mountain)|Vlašić, Čvrsnica, and Prenj. Eastern Bosnia also features mountains like Trebević, Jahorina, Igman, Bjelašnica and Treskavica. It was here that the 1984 Winter Olympics were held.Eastern Bosnia is heavily forested along the river Drina, and overall close to 50% of Bosnia and Herzegovina is forested. Most forest areas are in Central, Eastern and Western parts of Bosnia. Northern Bosnia contains very fertile agricultural land along the river Sava and the corresponding area is heavily farmed. This farmland is a part of the Parapannonian Plain stretching into neighbouring Croatia and Serbia. The river Sava and corresponding Posavina river basin hold the cities of Brčko, Bosanski Šamac, Bosanski Brod and Bosanska Gradiška.The northwest part of Bosnia is called Bosanska Krajina and holds the cities of Banja Luka, Prijedor, Sanski Most, Jajce, Cazin, Velika Kladuša and Bihać. Kozara National Park and Mrakovica World War II monument is located in this region.The country has only 1 of coastline,, ''The World Factbook'', 2006-08-22 around the town of Neum in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton, although surrounded by Croatian peninsulas it is possible to get to the middle of the Adriatic from Neum. By United Nations law, Bosnia has a right of passage to the outer sea. Neum has many hotels and is an important tourism destination.RiversFile:Vrelo Bosne 3.JPG|thumb|left|Bosna river, IlidžaThere are seven major rivers in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina:*The Una in the northwest part of Bosnia flows along the northern and western border of Bosnia and Croatia and through the Bosnian city of Bihać. It is a very beautiful river and popular for rafting and adventure sports.*The Sana flows through the city of Sanski Most and Prijedor and is a tributary of the river Una in the north.*The Vrbas flows through the cities of Gornji Vakuf - Uskoplje, Bugojno, Jajce, Banja Luka, Srbac and reaches the river Sava in the north. The Vrbas flows through the central part of Bosnia and flows outwards to the North.*The River Bosna is the longest river in Bosnia and is fully contained within the country as it stretches from its source near Sarajevo to the river Sava in the north. It gave its name to the country.*The Drina flows through the eastern part of Bosnia, at many places in the border between Bosnia and Serbia. The Drina flows through the cities of Foča, Goražde Višegrad and Zvornik.*The Neretva river is a large river in Central and Southern Bosnia, flowing from Jablanica south to the Adriatic Sea. The river is famous as it flows through the famous city of Mostar.*Percent of population affected by Flood Disasters in Europe by country from 2005-2015.The Sava river is the largest river in Bosnia and Herzegovina but not the largest river that is flowing through Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Sava river flows through Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. Sava is used as a natural border between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia and towns like Brčko, Bosanski Šamac, Bosanska Gradiška lies on the river.PhytogeographyPhytogeographically, Bosnia and Herzegovina belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region and Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. According to the WWF, the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.ClimateThe southern and western parts of the country have a Mediterranean climate while inland areas and areas with high elevation experience short, cool summers and long, severe winters. There are mild, rainy winters along the coast.File:Bosnia and Herzegovina map of Köppen climate classification.svg|thumb|300px|Bosnia and Herzegovina map of Köppen climate classification.Mining industryFile:Calcite Crystal from Trebević.JPG|thumb|200px|left| Calcite Crystal found at Trebević mountain around Sarajevo; Bosnia and Herzegovina on display at National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina.Various archaeological artifacts including relicts of mining activities and tools belonging to similar age groups, provide an indication of the geographical distribution, scale and methods of mining activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Paleolithic to Roman era.Most important of these is the so-called area of “central Bosnian mountains” located between the rivers Vrbas, Lašva, Neretva, Rama and their tributaries. The second one is the area of western Bosnia, bordered by the Vrbas and Una rivers, with its main orebearing formations found in the river-valleys of Sana and Japra, and their tributaries. The third area is eastern Bosnia, around the river Drina between the towns of Foča and Zvornik, the principal mining activity centered around Srebrenica.Ores of various metals, including iron, are found in these areas and exploitation has been going on for more than 5000 years – from the period of prehistoric human settlers, thorugh Illyrian, Roman, Slavic, Turkish and Austrian rulers, into the present.Land use*'''Arable land:''' 19.73%*'''Permanent crops:''' 2.06%*'''Other:''' 78.22% (2012 est.)'''Irrigated land:'''30km² (2003)'''Total renewable water resources:'''37.5km3 (2011)Environment'''Natural hazards:'''*Destructive earthquakes'''Current issues:'''*Air pollution from metallurgical plants*Sites for disposing of urban waste are limited*Widespread casualties, water shortages, and destruction of infrastructure because of the 1992-95 war*Deforestation'''International agreements:'''*Party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands*Signed, but not ratified: noneGalleryFile:Mountain Vlašić - Bosnia and Herzegovina.jpg|Vlašić (mountain), part of Dinaric AlpsFile:KozarackiKamen.jpg|A part of Kozara National Park near Prijedor in Bosanska Krajina.;/center;See also* List of cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina*Geography of Europe*Bosnia and HerzegovinaReferences;referencesClimate ofGeography of Bosnia and Herzegovinabn:বসনিয়া ও হার্জেগোভিনা#ভূগোল