The Batswana, a term also used to denote all citizens of Botswana, refers to the country's major ethnic group (called the "Tswana" in Southern Africa). Prior to European contact, the Batswana lived as herders and farmers under tribal rule.Before European contactBantu expansionSometime between 200-500AD, the Bantu-speaking people who were living in the Katanga area (today part of the DRC and Zambia) crossed the Limpopo River, entering the area today known as South Africa as part of the Bantu expansion.There were 2 broad waves of immigration to South Africa; Nguni and Sotho-Tswana. The former settled in the eastern coastal regions, while the latter settled primarily in the area known today as the Highveld ;mdash; the large, relatively high central plateau of South Africa.By 1000AD the Bantu colonization of the eastern half of South Africa had been completed (but not Western Cape and Northern Cape, which are believed to have been inhabited by Khoisan people until Dutch colonisation). The Bantu-speaking society was highly a decentralized feudal society organized on a basis of kraals (an enlarged clan), headed by a chief, who owed a very hazy allegiance to the nation's head chief. According to Neil Parsons's online "Brief History of Botswana":Bechuanaland ProtectorateBechuanaland ProtectorateGerman map in use in 1905 still showing the undivided Bechuanaland areaA map of 1887 showing the Protectorate and British BechuanalandModern Botswana. The country's borders have been stable since independence in 1966In the late 19th century, hostilities broke out between the Shona inhabitants of Botswana and Ndebele tribes who were migrating into the territory from the Kalahari Desert. Tensions also escalated with the Boer settlers from the Transvaal. After appeals by the Batswana leaders Khama III, Bathoen, and Sebele I for assistance, the British Government on 31 March 1885 put "Bechuanaland" under its protection. The northern territory remained under direct administration as the Bechuanaland Protectorate and is today's Botswana, while the southern territory became part of the Cape Colony and is now part of the northwest province of South Africa; the majority of Setswana-speaking people today live in South Africa. The Tati Concessions Land, formerly part of the Matabele kingdom, was administered from the Bechuanaland Protectorate after 1893, to which it was formally annexed in 1911.When the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910 out of the main British colonies in the region, the Bechuanaland Protectorate, Basutoland (now Lesotho), and Swaziland (the "High Commission Territories") were not included, but provision was made fortheir later incorporation. However, a vague undertaking was given to consult their inhabitants, and although successive South African governments sought to have the territories transferred, Britain kept delaying, and it never occurred. The election of theNational Party government in 1948, which instituted apartheid, and South Africa's withdrawal from the Commonwealth in 1961, ended any prospect of incorporation of the territories into South Africa.An expansion of British central authority and the evolution of tribal government resulted in the 1920 establishment of two advisory councils representing Africans and Europeans. Proclamations in 1934 regularized tribal rule and powers. A European-African advisory council was formed in 1951, and the 1961 constitution established a consultative legislative council.Independent BotswanaIn June 1966, Britain accepted proposals for democratic self-government in Botswana. The seat of government was moved from Mafikeng in South Africa, to newly established Gaborone in 1965. The 1965 constitution led to the first general elections and to independence on 30 September 1966. Seretse Khama, a leader in the independence movement and the legitimate claimant to the Ngwato chiefship, was elected as the first president, re-elected twice, and died in office in 1980. The presidency passed to the sitting vice president, Ketumile Masire, who was elected in his own right in 1984 and re-elected in 1989 and 1994. Masire retired from office in 1998. The presidency passed to the sitting vice president, Festus Mogae, who was elected in his own right in 1999 and re-elected in 2004. In April 2008, Vice President Lt. Gen. Seretse Khama Ian Khama (Ian Khama), son of Seretse Khama the first president, succeeded to the presidency when Festus Mogae retired.See also*Colonial heads of Botswana (Bechuanaland)*Heads of government of Botswana*History of Africa*History of Southern Africa*History of Gaborone* Timeline of Gaborone*List of Presidents of Botswana*Politics of Botswana*Postage stamps and postal history of Bechuanaland ProtectorateReferences;referencesFurther reading* Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. "An african success story: Botswana." (2002). [online]* Cohen, Dennis L.  "The Botswana Political Elite: Evidence from the 1974 General Election," ''Journal of Southern African Affairs,'' (1979) 4, 347-370.* Colclough, Christopher and Stephen McCarthy. ''The Political Economy of Botswana: A Study of Growth and Income Distribution'' (Oxford University Press, 1980)** Edge,  Wayne A. and Mogopodi H. Lekorwe eds. ''Botswana: Politics and Society'' (Pretoria:  J.L. van Schaik, 1998)* Fawcus, Peter and Alan Tilbury. ''Botswana: The Road to Independence'' (Pula Press, 2000)* Good, Kenneth. "Interpreting the Exceptionality of Botswana," ''Journal of Modern African Studies'' (1992)  30, 69-95.* Good, Kenneth. "Corruption and Mismanagement in Botswana: A Best-Case Example?" ''Journal of Modern African Studies,'' (1994)  32, 499-521.* Parsons, Neil. ''King Khama, Emperor Joe and the Great White Queen'' (University of Chicago Press, 1998)* Parsons, Neil, Thomas Tlou and Willie Henderson. ''Seretse Khama, 1921-1980'' (Bloemfontein: Macmillan,  1995)* Samatar, Abdi Ismail. ''An African miracle: State and class leadership and colonial legacy in Botswana development'' (Heinemann Educational Books, 1999)* Thomas Tlou ; Alec Campbell, ''History of Botswana'' (Gaborone: Macmillan, 2nd edn. 1997) ISBN 0-333-36531-3External links