Aspirated consonant#Voiced stop'''Murmur''' (also called '''breathy voice''', '''whispery voice''', '''soughing''' and '''susurration''') is a phonation in which the vocal cords vibrate, as they do in normal (modal) voicing, but are adjusted so that a larger volume of air escapes, producing a sighing sound. A simple murmured phonation,  (not actually a fricative, as a literal reading of the IPA chart would suggest), can sometimes be heard as an allophone of English  between vowels, e.g. in the word ''behind'', for some speakers.In the context of the Indo-Aryan languages (e.g. Sanskrit and Hindi) and comparative Indo-European studies, murmured consonants are often called ''voiced aspirated'', as in e.g. the Hindi and Sanskrit stops normally denoted ''bh, dh, ḍh, jh,'' and ''gh'' and the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European phoneme ''gʷʰ''.  From an articulatory perspective this terminology is incorrect, as murmur is a different type of phonation from aspiration. However, murmured and aspirated stops are acoustically similar in that in both cases there is a delay in the onset of full voicing. In the history of several languages (e.g. Greek and some varieties of Chinese), murmured stops have developed into aspirated stops.There is some confusion as to the nature of murmured phonation. The IPA and authors such as Ladefoged equate phonemically contrastive murmur with ''breathy voice'', in which the vocal folds are held with lower tension (and further apart) than in modal voice, with a concomitant increase in airflow and slower vibration of the glottis. In this model, murmur is a point in a continuum of glottal aperture between modal voice and breath phonation (voicelessness). Others, such as Laver, Catford, Trask and the authors of the VoQS, equate murmur with ''whispery voice'', in which the vocal folds (or at least the anterior part of the vocal folds) vibrate as in modal voice, but the arytenoid cartileges are held apart to allow a large turbulent airflow between them. In this model, murmur is a compound phonation of approximately modal voice plus whisper. It is possible that the realization of murmur varies between individuals or languages. The IPA uses the term "breathy voice", while VoQS uses the term "whispery voice". Either will accept the term "murmur", which was popularized by Ladefoged.Trask (1996) "breathy voice", "murmur", "whispery voice", in ''A Dictionary of Phonetics and Phonology''.TranscriptionA stop with murmured release is transcribed in the IPA as either  etc. or  etc. Murmured vowels are most often written  etc.In the VoQS, the notation } is used for true breathy voice, retaining the terminology of the IPA but changing the use of the diacritic, while } is used for whispery voice, the intent of the IPA diacritic . Thus some authors, such as Laver, suggest the alternative transcription }} (rather than IPA }}) as the correct analysis of Gujarati , though it could be confused with the replacement of modal voicing in voiced segments with whispered phonation, conventionally transcribed with the diacritic .Methods of productionThere are several ways to produce murmured sounds such as . One is to hold the vocal cords apart, so that they are lax as they are for , but to increase the volume of airflow so that they vibrate loosely. A second is to bring the vocal cords closer together along their entire length than in voiceless , but not as close as in modally voiced sounds such as vowels. This results in an airflow intermediate between  and vowels, and is the case with English intervocalic /h/. A third is to constrict the glottis, but separate the arytenoid cartilages that control one end. This results in the vocal cords being drawn together for voicing in the back, but separated to allow the passage of large volumes of air in the front. This is the situation with Hindi.The distinction between the latter two of these realizations, vocal cords somewhat separated along their length (''breathy voice'') and vocal cords together with the arytenoids making an opening (''whispery voice''), is phonetically relevant in White Hmong.Fulop ; Golston (2008), ''Breathy and whispery voicing in White Hmong'', Retrieved 17 June 2012.Phonological propertyA number of languages use breathy voicing in a phonologically contrastive way. Many Indo-Aryan languages, such as Hindi, typically have a four-way contrast among plosives and affricates (voiced, murmured, tenuis, aspirated) and a two-way contrast among nasals (voiced, murmured). The Nguni languages in the southern Bantu languages family, including Phuthi, Xhosa, Zulu, Ndebele and Swati, also have contrastive murmur. In the case of Xhosa, there is a four-way contrast analogous to Indic in oral clicks, and similarly a two-way contrast among nasal clicks, but a three-way contrast among plosives and affricates (murmured, aspirated, and ejective), and two-way contrasts among fricatives (voiceless and murmured) and nasals (voiced and murmured).In some Bantu languages, historically murmured stops have been phonetically devoiced, but the four-way contrast in the system has been retained. In all five of the southeastern Bantu languages named, the murmured stops (even if they are realised phonetically as devoiced aspirates) have a marked tone-lowering (or tone-depressing) effect on the following tautosyllabic vowels. For this reason, such stop consonants are frequently referred to in the local linguistic literature as 'depressor' stops.Swati, and even more so Phuthi, display good evidence that breathy voicing can be used as a morphological property independent of any consonant voicing value. For example, in both languages, the standard morphological mechanism for achieving the morphosyntactic copula is to simply execute the noun prefix syllable as murmured (or 'depressed').In Portuguese, vowels after the stressed syllable can be pronounced with murmur.Callou, Dinah. Leite, Yonne. "Iniciação à Fonética e à Fonologia". Jorge Zahar Editor 2001, p. 20Gujarati is unusual in contrasting murmured vowels and consonants:  'twelve',  'outside',  'burden'.Juǀ'hoan dialect|Tsumkwe Juǀʼhoan makes the following rare distinctions :  fall, land (of a bird etc.);  walk;  herb species; and /n|ʱoaᵑ/ greedy person; /n|oaʱᵑ/ catMurmured stops in Punjabi lost their murmur, merging with voiceless and voiced stops in various positions, and a system of high and low tones developed in syllables that formerly had these sounds.See also* Aspiration* Creaky voice* List of phonetics topics* Slack voice* Whispering* GutturalReferencesNotesGeneral references*