Image:Alaska Panhandle.png|thumb|250px|Southeast Alaska and Alaska Marine Highway ferry routes'''Southeast Alaska''', sometimes referred to as the '''Alaska Panhandle''', is the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of Alaska, which lies west from the northern half of the Canadian province, British Columbia. The majority of Southeast Alaska's area is part of the Tongass National Forest, the United States' largest national forest. In many places, the international border runs along the crest of the Boundary Ranges of the Coast Mountains (see Alaska boundary dispute). The region is noted for its scenery and mild rainy climate.Misty Fjords Waterfall and kayakImage:TongassForest1.jpg|thumb|right|The Tongass National Forest, near KetchikanCruise ships at KetchikanGeographySoutheast Alaska is the northern terminus of the Inside Passage, a protected waterway of convoluted passages between islands and fjords, beginning in Puget Sound in Washington state. This was an important travel corridor for Tlingit and Haida Native peoples, as well as gold-rush era steamships. In modern times it is an important route for Alaska Marine Highway ferries as well as cruise ships.Southeast Alaska has a land area of sqkm comprising seven entire boroughs and two census areas, in addition to the portion of the Yakutat Borough lying east of 141st meridian west|141° West longitude. Although it has only 6.14 percent of Alaska's land area, it is larger than the state of Maine, and almost as large as the state of Indiana. The Southeast Alaskan coast is roughly as long as the west coast of Canada. The 2010 census population of Southeast was 71,616 inhabitants, about 45 percent of whom were concentrated in the city of Juneau.*Haines Borough*Hoonah-Angoon Census Area*Juneau Borough*Ketchikan Gateway Borough*Petersburg Borough*Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area*Sitka Borough*Skagway Borough*Wrangell Borough*Yakutat Borough (the part east of 141st meridian west|141° W  longitude; 12,506.53km2 / 4,828.80sqmi, or about 63.12 percent of the borough)It includes the Tongass National Forest, Glacier Bay National Park, Admiralty Island National Monument, Misty Fjords National Monument, Sitka National Historical Park, Alaska's Inside Passage, and myriad large and small islands. The largest islands are, from North to South, Chichagof Island, Admiralty Island, Baranof Island, Kupreanof Island, Revillagigedo Island and Prince of Wales Island. Major bodies of water of Southeast Alaska include Glacier Bay, Lynn Canal, Icy Strait, Chatham Strait, Stephens Passage, Frederick Sound, Sumner Strait, and Clarence Strait.On August 20, 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt established the Alexander Archipelago Forest Reserve, which formed the heart of the Tongass National Forest that covers most of the region.National parks and monuments*Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve*Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park*Sitka National Historical Park*Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve (part, the southeasternmost section only)*Admiralty Island National Monument*Misty Fjords National MonumentEcologySoutheast Alaska is a temperate rain forest within the Pacific temperate rain forest zone, as classified by the World Wildlife Fund's ecoregion system, which extends from northern California to Prince William Sound. The most common tree species are sitka spruce and western hemlock.Wildlife includes brown bears, black bears, the endemic Alexander Archipelago wolf, Sitka black-tailed deer, humpback whales, orcas, five species of salmon, bald eagles, harlequin ducks, scoters, and marbled murrelets.Cities and townsMajor cities are Juneau, Ketchikan, and Sitka. Other towns are Petersburg, Wrangell, Metlakatla, Haines, Hoonah, Angoon, Kake, Craig, Klawock, Thorne Bay, Yakutat, Skagway, and Gustavus. There are also many towns and villages with +/- 100 people, such as Baranof Warm Springs, Edna Bay, Elfin Cove, Excursion Inlet, Funter Bay, Hyder, Meyers Chuck, Pelican, Port Alexander, Port Frederick, Port Protection, and Tenakee Springs.Cultureright|Totem pole at Sitka National Historical ParkThis area is the traditional homeland of the Tlingit, and home of a historic settling of Haida as well as a modern settlement of Tsimshian. The region is closely connected to Seattle and the American Pacific Northwest economically and culturally.In modern times, southeastern Alaskans can often be identified by their fashion choices, notablyXtratuf boots, and "shirtjacs" (a garment having aspects of both shirt and jacket).IndustryMajor industries in Southeast Alaska include commercial fishing and tourism (primarily the cruise ship industry). Logging has been an important industry in the past, but has been steadily declining with competition from other areas and the closure of the region's major pulp mills.HistoryThe border between the Canadian province of British Columbia and Alaska is known as the Alaska boundary dispute, where the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom and British Columbia claimed different borderlines at the Alaskan Panhandle. While the British foreign affairs were in favour of support of the Canadian argument, the event resulted in what was thought of as a betrayal, leading to alienation of the British from the new nation of Canada.Historian Patricia Roppel authored thirteen books and more than 100 articles on the region.TransportationDue to the extremely rugged, mountainous nature of Southeastern Alaska, almost all communities (with the exception of Hyder, Skagway, and Haines) have no road connections outside of their locale, so aircraft and boats are the major means of transport. The Alaska Marine Highway passes through this region.Air transportationAlaska Airlines is by far the largest air carrier in the region, with Juneau's Juneau International Airport serving as the aerial hub for all of Southeast and Ketchikan's Ketchikan International Airport serving as a secondary hub for southern Southeast Alaska. Alaska's bush airlines  and air taxis serve many of the smaller and more isolated communities and villages in the regions. Many communities are accessible by air only by floatplane, as proper runways are often difficult to construct on the steep island slopes.Marine transportationSoutheast Alaska is primarily served by the state-run Alaska Marine Highway, which links Skagway, Haines, Hoonah, Juneau, Sitka, Petersburg, Wrangell, Ketchikan and other outlying communities with Prince Rupert, BC and Bellingham, Washington; and secondarily by the Prince of Wales Island-based Inter-Island Ferry Authority, which provides the only scheduled passenger and auto ferry service to the island. A new Authority, the Rainforest Islands Ferry Authority, was created and in 2014 may possibly operate the North End route. The Authority would connect Coffman Cove with Wrangell and Petersburg. Small companies like Sitka-based Allen Marine and other independent operators in the Lynn Canal occasionally also offer marine passenger service. Ship traffic in the area is seasonally busy with cruise ships.See also*Alexander Archipelago*Alexander Archipelago wolf*List of edible plants and mushrooms of southeast AlaskaReferencesExternal links*[The regional economy of southeast Alaska: final report] / prepared for Alaska Conservation Foundation; prepared by Steve Colt, Darcy Dugan, Ginny Fay (EcoSystems). Hosted by [Alaska State Publications Program].*[Southeast Alaska energy export study: final report] / prepared for The Southeast Conference; by D. Hittle ; Associates, Inc., in association with Commonwealth Associates, Inc. Hosted by the [Alaska State Publications Program].*[Swan - Tyee intertie economic analysis] / prepared for the Four Dam Pool Power Agency; prepared by Commonwealth Associates, Inc. Hosted by [Alaska State Publications Program].