Blink-182?When was Blink-182 ever considered a boy band? They did a video mocking them, but that didn't make them one. Unless there are reliable sources to the contrary, they should be removed from the article. --‖ Ebyabe talk - Special:Contributions/Ebyabe|''Opposites Attract'';;/font; ‖ 22:51, 24 August 2013 (UTC)A-ha?!A-ha is another band which doesn't really belong in this article. What criteria are we using to distinguish a "boy band" from any other all-male band? A-ha wrote their own songs, played their own instruments, chose their own clothes, were not dancers and didn't use choreographers, formed by themselves, got "discovered" the old-fashioned way by sending demo tapes to record companies, and had a definite lead singer with the two backing singers who were primarily instrumentalists rarely singing solo or even having substantial vocal parts in the band. The only characteristics which fit the "boy band" pigeonhole are that they were young men when they became famous and were particularly popular with girls. If that's all it takes to be labelled a "boyband", we could apply that label to The Beatles, Bon Jovi, Elliot Minor, Maroon 5... you get the idea. --Contains Mild Peril (talk) 09:36, 25 May 2014 (UTC):Yes, by all means take them out. The only criteria should be that reliable sources call them a boyband. Anyone who understands what that means would exclude them.--'''User:Sabrebd|SabreBD''' (User talk:Sabrebd|talk) 12:09, 25 May 2014 (UTC)::I think it's better to completely remove them than writing this: "though they were not a boy band in the usual sense: they played their own instruments, wrote their own songs and felt burdened by their poster-boy image" because a lot of manufactured boy bands did/felt the same. Besides, the lead paragraph of the article already says that some boy bands do play instruments so it's not a strong enough reason to be listed there. I do agree they're not a boy band so I vote to remove them from the article.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 13:51, 25 May 2014 (UTC):::Fair enough. Contains Mild Peril (talk) 16:06, 25 May 2014 (UTC)One DirectionCan somebody update the list of top ten best selling boy bands? One Direction should definitely be on there somewhere. Their label Columbia Records recently put out a press release stating they've sold more than 65 million records —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/73.201.25.208|73.201.25.208 (talk) 06:12, 24 August 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:WP:PRIMARY You need to find a reliable secondary source for this.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 15:04, 24 August 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Boy band. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20110809052615/toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers. —User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;16:53, 25 August 2015 (UTC)Theres a Mistake you need to take in considerationThis text above is the original content exist from the started ( at least 2/1 uears ago ) , the only part i add are about tremendous records in Asia and the best selling foreign artist in Japan . Thats all .how do you explain and removed a big part of Original content ? —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) ;;;:First, please sign your posts as explained here WP:SIGN. Second, I already stated why on the comments: because they're fancruft and gives an undue weight to the group in question. There's no need to write such a detailed paragraph for a single group because this article is about boy bands in general not just one specific boy band.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 14:59, 1 September 2015 (UTC)youre wrong about ;1. The title - the original title stated the other boyband and TVXQ ( South Korean boyband ) is included in the title2. You deleted the title3. The new article stated TVXQ had a success all over Asia but theres no legit source in that ,4. I stated TVXQ had a massive success all over Asia and The Group is the best selling foreign artist in Japan and put a directed ( legit ) proof to that .so how do you explain ?  You did not put any source and change a big part of original content ( you change the original Title as well ) and all i did is put a source to support the original text  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 15:18, 1 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:Yes I did change the title as TVXQ was never that big to begin with. The title is reserved for boy bands who are iconic to the decade in question. For example, Backstreet Boys is mentioned in the title because obviously they're the biggest boy band in the world in the early 2000s. Westlife is very big in Europe and Asia. Jonas Brothers was the biggest boy band of the "new" generation, as in late 2000s. And F4 is the only Asian boy band who ever blew up big, on par with BSB/Westlife popularity in Asia. That's why those 4 boy bands are in the title. And like I mentioned earlier,there's no need to mention a single group's achievement, unless it's very significant. Also you need to provide a source that support the statement that TVXQ was big all over Asia. Or if you can't find a source you can remove the statement.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 15:25, 1 September 2015 (UTC)Ok there youre are being bias here ,how do you explain The original title remain the same over the past years until you changed it based on your bias logicand what about F4 ? They are nothing compare to TVXQ , you better dont pull a joke herehow do i proof TVXQ is big all over Asia ? **** i put a link in first place to support the statements and you said yourselvee that this is not where one should wrote an essayTVXQ is among the Top 30 significant boyband in historyhttp:/top40.about.com/od/Performers/ss/Top-30-Boy-Bands-Of-All-Time-A-History.htm  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 15:51, 1 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:That site is not reliable. Now if you were around in the early 2000s you'd know how big F4 was. They were virtually inescapable in Asia. TVXQ never reached their level of popularity. Now Super Junior's popularity was maybe closer to F4's. Please use this guide WP:NOENG on how to properly cite non-English articles.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 16:06, 1 September 2015 (UTC)Youre the most retard editor o had ever meet , i actually put a link for sake and support the statements and you want to doubt it baaed on your own " experience " , are hella joking ??Your are bias here obviouslyand you are not respomd to my questioned yet , hpw the gell the title remained the same over the past years ? Are you sayong other editor did not do their work ?F4 ? Are ya Joking ? How do you prove they are big in Asia ? Bullshit ?TVXQ attracted 393,000 attendance across Asia alone in 2008 . F4 ? BULLSHIT  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 16:15, 1 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:Basically, yes the title was incorrect before. But they are correct now. Now if you can't have a civil and objective discussion I'll no longer reply. Obviously you're just a fan. Please read up how Wikipedia works. WP:NEUTRAL--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 16:22, 1 September 2015 (UTC)you did not respond to whole question i throw dumbhow the hell you prove F4 is big in Asia ???You dumb editors edit Wiki based on uour ' experience " and bias ??? LMAOTVXQ is tge only Asia Artist to be invited to Michael Jackson Tribute to repreasent the WHOLE FREAKING ASIA .. where the hell is F4 ,??TVXQ break Bon Jovi records countlessly .... F4 ? LMAOdid F4 ever got praise directly by Backstreetboy ? HELL NO , I had a prove and link Backstreetboys praise TVXQ high directlyLMAO so the title is not correct before over the past years until you interupted it based on your bias ??? BULLSHIT  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 16:28, 1 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;Krystaleen I have fully protected the article for one week. If you cannot come to an agreement between yourselves please look at WP:DRR for other options. Further edit warring after protection expires may result in blocks. --User:NeilN|NeilN;/b; User talk:NeilN|talk to me;/i; 12:20, 3 September 2015 (UTC):Yay, thanks! It's frustrating to have your edits being reverted over and over again without a good reason.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 13:02, 3 September 2015 (UTC)HA youre a troll and bias  IMO . Conpare to you , i had prove that TVXQ is indeed bigger than F4 in Asia and worldwide . TVXQ is aknowledge Worldwide by Michael Jackson invitation and Backstreetboy . Theres many other by Oricon , Billboard , Smap and all worldwide critics from Us , Japan , Asia and many others  . F4 ? LOOOOOOOOLLLL , you edit Wiki page based on your so called " experience " is really laughable LOL LMAO  . What a dumb  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 13:13, 3 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:So tired of you going on and on and on about TVXQ while reverting my edits on the article that has NOTHING to do with TVXQ. You completely and rather spectacularly missed the point of my edits, and the point of the article.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 13:20, 3 September 2015 (UTC)LOL Troll, try harder. The one who revert and change the original content is you dumb. And your dumb statement about F4 beong more popular in Asia and Worldwide is laughable .  You never prove YET to me how the hell F4 is big in Asia and Worldwide, are you planning to play a fool and get away just like that? LMAO run if ya want. Just admit it youre a troll, haters, dumb and jelous because all you did on this article is based on your so called invalid (LOL) " experience " . Whata dumb credibility, you fail terrible as an editor. Wiki should not had any editor like you whp can not even edit article based on Prove, Spurce , and Feat.  LOL what a pain youre  —Preceding unsigned comment added by MugenDarkness (talk • Special:Contributions/MugenDarkness|contribs) 17:18, 5 September 2015 (UTC);;; ;;Protected edit request on 3 September 2015;;:File:Red information icon with gradient background.svg|20px|link= '''Not done:''';; A lot of this passage is uncited - you need to include to citations to reliable sources as outlined in Wikipedia:Verifiability. If there is uncited material in the article already, it needs to be either cited or removed. — '''''User:Mr. Stradivarius|Mr.Stradivarius''''' User talk:Mr. Stradivarius|♪talk♪ 06:06, 6 September 2015 (UTC)2000s: Backstreet Boys, Westlife, TVXQ!, Jonas Brothers and F4upright|Jonas Brothers are described as pop boy bandWith the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Dream Street, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone (better known today as an Internet meme), and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.At the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like The Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act, featuring members with a distinct fictional type. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb. All of the members of 2gether were actors and have moved onto other projects since the end of the MTV series that followed the made for TV movie.÷Since 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described "new boy bands" that are "more likely to resemble My Chemical Romance, Sum 41.In 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama Meteor Garden. Their popularity spread throughout Asia. With their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Shinhwa's fourth album, ''Hey, Come On!'', was released on June 8, 2001, debuting at #3 with the lead single "Hey, Come On!" rapidly climbing up the music charts. The album's release coincided with the rise of the Korean Wave, spreading the group's popularity overseas. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group's label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who had 13 members at its peak.In South Korea, TVXQ! rose to fame from their hit single "Rising Sun", in 2005, under SM Entertainment.TVXQ! immense success in Japan and tremendous achivements all over Asia and Worldwide open the door for the Hallyu Wave to grab a stable foothold in Asia and international market .The group is the best-selling foreign artist in Japan .In North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel, enabling them to sell over 180,000 copies of their album in a week in 2008 and hit number one on the American Billboard 200. Other new boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands haven't seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.;;MugenDarkness (talk) 17:29, 5 September 2015 (UTC)Most successful US Billboard/Australian singles chart?At the moment it says Boyz II Men for both which is correct for #1's in those countries. However is most successful number of top ten singles instead to determine success on singles chart? If so in Australia it would be One Direction (10) which is more than any other boyband. B2M had 4 top ten singles in Australia. If it's singles/albums so just in general One Direction have sold more than anyone else in Australia.