March 2007;;RevertsDo you like apples, I would advise you to try to separate your minor edits to this article from the more drastic changes. You have more chance of getting them accepted into the article that way. If you insist on combining minor and uncontroversial edits with drastic, and controversial, changes to the article then it is likely that everything will be reverted. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:22, 4 January 2016 (UTC):I have already done that. I made more than a dozen edits. You are just blindly rolling them all back. Do you like apples (talk) 22:24, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::You were already reverted once by another user. You should have taken the issue to the talk page immediately instead of simply restoring your edits. As it now stands, you are edit warring against multiple users, and have probably violated WP:3RR. Any attempt you make to justify yourself while behaving this way is going to fall on deaf ears. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:28, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::As I said, I made many separate edits to the article. If you have a problem with individual edits, revert those and then state your problem here and we'll attempt to work it out. Those you don't have a reason for contesting, don't revert. Blindly reverting all of my good faith edits is not constructive. Do you like apples (talk) 22:32, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::::Your disruptive behavior - edit warring against multiple users - is objectionable in and of itself. It gives other users a perfectly good reason to roll back your edits. Since you are apparently a new user, you are perhaps not familiar with policies such as WP:3RR, but that does not provide you with immunity against being blocked for violating them. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:38, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::::Please stop making this personal and attacking me. We disagree about the content of this article. That should be the focus here. I have already addressed that twice and you've yet to respond. Do you like apples (talk) 22:44, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::::::I am not attacking you by pointing out that your behavior is disruptive. I am pointing out the obvious. If you want to persuade other editors that you are editing in good faith, then you should revert your most recent changes, as they involve a WP:3RR violation. Have you read the policy yet? FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:48, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::::::Please stop trying to make this about me. We disagree on content. I am asking you for about the 5th or 6th time to focus on the content. Which of my edits did you disagree with and why? Do you like apples (talk) 22:50, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::I'll continue pointing out that your behaviour is problematic for as long as it continues being problematic. You will likely not be able to continue editing at all if you persist in behaving as you have thus far. To address your changes: they involve major and unexplained changes of meaning, and many do not seem to be improvements. For example, you altered the definition of anarcho-capitalism, changing it from advocating elimination of the state to advocating elimination of government. Government and the state are not the same thing, and I don't believe your change is correct. It should be reverted. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:55, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::::::::If you'd like to change the definition back to how it was before, I wont revert you. Do you like apples (talk) 22:58, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::::How nice of you. If I revert any of your ''other'' changes, would you revert me then? Do you accept that revert warring is not an acceptable way to try to improve articles? FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 22:59, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::::::::::Any individual change you disagree with, I'm fine with you reverting, if you state here why you reverted it, so we can discuss it. Do you like apples (talk) 23:02, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::::::Forcing your changes into an article through revert warring is unacceptable regardless of whether or not other users discuss each and every one of your changes. I will take a look through your changes and consider which of them may be improvements, but any changes that don't seem to benefit the article will certainly be reverted. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 23:37, 4 January 2016 (UTC):::::::::::::I ask you for about the 8th time to focus on the content and stop trying to make this personal. At this stage I feel this must be your strategy to contest my edits. There is no other reason you would keep repeatedly criticizing me. Do you like apples (talk) 00:01, 5 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::::::::You have now  yet another user, despite being told that edit warring against multiple users is unacceptable, and despite being warned about WP:3RR. At this stage, you deserve a block. Keep behaving the way you have been behaving, and you will likely be indefinitely blocked. There is no point in discussing content until you accept that you cannot continue behaving in this fashion. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 00:04, 5 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::::::::::"There is no point in discussing content" just as I suspected. Making this personal is your strategy for contesting my edits. Do you like apples (talk) 00:09, 5 January 2016 (UTC):::::::::::::::You said you were going to individually revert edits you disagreed with. If you would do as you said, this would not be an issue. I should not have all of my edits blindly reverted because people are too lazy to review them individually. Do you like apples (talk) 00:06, 5 January 2016 (UTC)Collapse discussion thread started by sockpuppet of blocked editormy editsPeople are rolling back all of my edits, rather than reviewing them individually. I'll list and explain them. Please note which you disagree with and why.edit 1'government' is the widely used and neutral term. 'state' is a term anarcho-capitalists have co-opted and use as a rallying cry, making it's usage not encyclopedic. in articles about North Korea or Nazi Germany, we don't use the propaganda terms of those regimes, we use encyclopedic terms. we should do the same here.:The "state" or "Etat" is the common word to define the ruling construct in its entirety (i.e. a state is more then a government, but also related customs, respect, ext.), very common in socialist literature as well. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:14, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 2change to neutral and encyclopedia phrasing, from the anarcho-capitalist preferred characterization. the idea that there would even be competitors is theoretical.: This states what anarcho-capitalist claim, you might not even agree that private companies by themselves are possible, it doesn't matter this is not stated as a historical fact. You seem to have a big misunderstanding regarding how to NPOV. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:25, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 3Means the same thing, without the anarcho-capitalism preferred phrasing (propaganda).: See above. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:25, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 4"Therefore, personal and economic activities under anarcho-capitalism would be regulated by victim-based dispute resolution organizations]under tort and contract law, rather than by statute through centrally determined punishment under political monopolies" to "Personal and economic activities would be regulated by victim-based dispute resolution organizations under tort and contract law, rather than by statute through centrally determined punishment by governments."More encyclopedic and neutral and removes the propaganda phrasing.edit 5"would be regulated by victim-based dispute resolution organizations under tort and contract law, rather than by statute through centrally determined punishment by governments." to "would be regulated by dispute resolution organizations rather than by governments."More encyclopedic and neutral and removes the propaganda phrasing.edit 6that explains how the name anarcho-capitalism came about, to it's own section at the top of the body of the article. Moved 'history' section up to just below this section.Lede was too big and this looks better. Style is also to have history at the top of an article like this.edit 7These are not similar to anarcho-capitalism and only serve to lend credibility to the ideas. This is an encyclopedia, not a propaganda tool.:They are heavily referenced in anarcho capitalist literature. Removal, instead of using better wording, is just not good faith edits. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:31, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 8edit 9of pro-anarcho capitalism books and publications. If these are notable they can be used as references.edit 10, it's some random website.:The flag is correct, easily sourced from anywhere. This removal borders on non good faith edits. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:12, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 11. See edit 1: 'statism' is propaganda and not encyclopedic.:Nope, it's just the correct word. Etatism in french is also common. Your change of government to state is also misguided. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:09, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 12at the top of 'Classical liberalism' section.: I'm stopping reviewing your changes with this blatant vandalism. All you edits '''should be first removed'''. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:27, 6 January 2016 (UTC)edit 13edit 14'One notable was' and 'who'edit 15, 16. See edit 1.Do you like apples (talk) 00:56, 5 January 2016 (UTC): "State" is the correct term. "Statism" as a term is NOT propaganda, and that you call it such means you are not editing in good faith. As such: you're not going to get anywhere with your obvious POV-pushing. If you would have made some suggestions FIRST and not just demanded that we kowtow to your POV, you might have gotten somewhere. But you didn't. You're going to have a really tough go of it now. - Knight of BAAWA (talk) 02:34, 5 January 2016 (UTC)::FWIW many of the edits look fine to me: some of the more minor ones are simple copyediting (eg edit 14), and I concur with the removal of many of the entries under further reading etc (eg edits 8 and 9), which seem to be simply promotion of fairly obscure essays and websites for the most part. Others, such as edits 2 and 3 which remove the stress on competition, and 1 re "state" vs "government", are more moot, since they are minor changes, with pretty much interchangeable phrasing/terms in the context. The attempted edits are certainly not clear evidence of blatant "POV" though (I think there's a saying about motes and eyes). Indeed, edits 11 and 13, which together rephrased talk about people "leading the attack against statism" in WP's voice are rather clearly de-POVing the text, one would have thought. I'd disagree with edit 6, which removes arguably relevant historical background out of the lead, but would agree that a lot of the material removed outright in edit 7 is speculative and/or too reliant on blog sources in part. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';19:12, 5 January 2016 (UTC):::Some of the edits may be OK, but the edit warring user was trying to change the article in an inappropriate way. The removal of large parts of the article obviously needed to be discussed first. The change from "state" to "government" is not a minor change at all. It is a major change, and it is incorrect. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 19:17, 5 January 2016 (UTC)::::I'm not sure the distinction is as significant as that. They are not of course synonymous, but the terms "government" and "state" are often used pretty much interchangeably when discussing anarchism and anarcho-capitalism and in political discourse more generally. Indeed the dictionary I just looked at prefers "government" when defining what anarchism is against, as does Peter Marshall's history of anarchism. As for anarcho-capitalism itself, Rothbard for example seems to happily talk about "government" when talking about what he is against. The switch certainly doesn't flip the meaning of what's being said on its head. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';19:39, 5 January 2016 (UTC)::::::Well, do you want the article to be accurate or not? There is a technical distinction between state and government and it is relevant to understanding anarcho-capitalism, so one term should not simply replace the other. What one dictionary says about "anarchism" generally is not relevant, as the article is about anarcho-capitalism. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 20:10, 5 January 2016 (UTC):::::::Of course I want the article to be accurate, hence why I cited some evidence as to usage; the point is that I think this is splitting hairs. My comment acknowledged of course that the terms are not universally synonymous – and also that there is a distinction between anarchism and anarcho-capitalism – but we just happen to disagree about how significant the difference between the two terms is in this context. It's not that you want the page to be accurate and I don't. Since I'm not favouring one term over the other anyway, further debate on the point is fairly redundant twice over. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';22:45, 5 January 2016 (UTC):::::::From the opening paragraph of the Anarchism article: "While anti-statism is central, anarchism entails opposing authority or hierarchical organisation in the conduct of human relations, including, but not limited to, the state system." Clearly--and I don't think you have an issue with it--statism as used by anarchists isn't propagandist in the least. Yet if we turn to one of the edit summaries of the edits-in-question, we find this "replaced 'state' with 'government' in most cases. government is the accepted term. 'state' is used as anarcho-capitalist propaganda." That's just one of the issues with this person. And then there's the question of removing a swath of the article without so much as discussing it here first! - Knight of BAAWA (talk) 00:20, 6 January 2016 (UTC):It is my position that all these edits should first be reverted as so many of them (though not all) are unencyclopedic. --MeUser42 (talk) 08:32, 6 January 2016 (UTC)::They already have been. The user who made them posted on the talk page after they were (several times), trying to seek approval to have them reinstated. As suggested above, some of the reaction to the substance of the edits (as opposed to the edit-warring – and plenty of people have edit-warred over this page) is a little OTT. Most of them are not egregiously unencyclopedic or POV or whatever. Several of them have merit; others are of marginal import. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';10:20, 6 January 2016 (UTC)Sources"Every article on Wikipedia must be based upon verifiable statements from multiple third-party reliable sources with a reputation for fact-checking and accuracy. A third-party source is one that is entirely independent of the subject being covered." WP:THIRDPARTYThe only source in this article that meets that criteria seems to be Playboy Magazine. All the rest are primary and secondary sources that are unsuitable as references. That is, Anarcho-Capitalists writing about their own ideas or about topics they are not independent from. I suggest this article be deleted as 95% of the information in it is not properly sourced. A new article can be written, conforming to policy. EoT State (talk) 05:57, 7 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;:In other words, this is article is not encyclopedic. It is Anarcho Capitalism, as defined and explained by Anarcho Capitalists. A violation of WP:NPOV. It needs instead to be Anarcho Capitalism, as defined and explained by neutral and reliable third parties. EoT State (talk) 06:08, 7 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;*'''Note''' EoT State has been indef blocked as a sockpuppet of DegenFarang . --TFD (talk) 13:10, 9 January 2016 (UTC) (UTC);:Mostly agree.  However being independent does not mean not sharing the same ideas, it means having a financial interest.  The sources nonetheless fail rs as secondary sources.  Look forward to you re-writing the article with reliable sources.  TFD (talk) 06:18, 7 January 2016 (UTC)::To be fair, there are a few more legitimate third-party sources than that currently being used. Plus primary sources are not barred altogether, it's just that you have to be wary of overinterpreting them. Rothbard's work can be cited and quoted directly, for example, as evidence of what his positions were. But the direction of the page is very much evangelical. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';10:52, 7 January 2016 (UTC):::It's interesting that we have a brand new account proposing to remove most of the article's content starting up immediately after an older account was blocked for attempting something very similar. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 23:01, 7 January 2016 (UTC)::::The following are some independent, reliable sources that can be used in the article. ["Contra Anarcho-capitalism"], , , , , , [ftp://148.231.212.8/Backups/temps/RespaldoMac/Documents/Downloads/3_1_2.pdf "An American Experiment in AnarchoCapitalism: The -Not So Wild, Wild West"], .. For example, the ''Journal of Libertarian Studies'', the source of the first, seventh and eighth references listed below, is quite reliable. North AmericaUser talk:Northamerica1000|1000;/font; 03:17, 8 January 2016 (UTC):::::What leads you to believe these sources are reliable, with a reputation for fact checking and accuracy? An Anarcho-Capitalist writing a book does not seem to meet that requirement. #7, from a University, may work. But #3, for example, clearly would not. I can write a book that says I'm Santa Claus. That doesn't mean I am or that Wikipedia should say in its voice that I am. EoT State (talk) 03:23, 8 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;* Below is a partial summary about source #3 above, ''Political Ideology Today'', from [this source]. The book is published by Manchester University Press, which is the university press of the University of Manchester, England and an academic publisher of academic books and journals. It is clearly an integral and reliable source. The book was written by Ian Adams. You assume that Adams is an anarcho-capitalist, but provide no qualification for your assumption. Are you sure about that? North AmericaUser talk:Northamerica1000|1000;/font; 03:37, 8 January 2016 (UTC)''Political Ideology Today'' – This second edition of an established textbook on political ideology provides a comprehensive, up-to-date introduction to the powerful and persuasive ideas which have motivated the actions of both political leaders and the electorate.;/blockquote;::I'm not sure there is a lot of point explaining reliable sources to someone who does not want to be convinced. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 03:38, 8 January 2016 (UTC):::You are the one pushing a clear POV. I'm here to improve the encyclopedia. STOP ASSUMING BAD FAITH. EoT State (talk) 04:49, 8 January 2016 (UTC)::::It would be easier than it is to assume good faith if you could have provided a convincing answer to the question I put to you on your talk page; as it is, you are quite likely to be blocked for disruption. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 04:51, 8 January 2016 (UTC):::::I said I have no idea who that is. I'd like to improve this article. I'd appreciate it if you could either help or leave me alone. Your emotional drama does not interest me. 04:58, 8 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;::::::I think that your most recent edits are not helpful, and should be reverted. I will probably revert them myself soon. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 05:53, 8 January 2016 (UTC):::::::I know you think the purpose of talk pages is to harass people, but actually they are intended to discuss disagreements with content. If you have an opinion on the sources in the article and why they are from reliable, independent third party sources known for fact checking and accuracy, this would be the place to share your views. Unilaterally declaring good faith edits "not helpful" is itself, not helpful. EoT State (talk) 06:07, 8 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;::::::::OK then, your edits seem unhelpful because they remove content based on what is apparently nothing more than ideological disagreement with the sources used. Thus, they should be reverted. FreeKnowledgeCreator (talk) 06:37, 8 January 2016 (UTC)::::::::EoT State I'm concerned about your analysis methods of what constitutes a reliable source, per discussion about source #3 listed above (''Political Ideology Today''). You state above that it is clearly not reliable, but my research and commentary above indicates that it is clearly entirely reliable. You also deemed the author to be an anarcho-capitalist, but provide absolutely no qualification to back up your opinion. You seem to base source reliability upon a preconception that supports your view about virtually none of the sources being reliable except for the Playboy Magazine source, per your statement above and at your nomination at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Anarcho-capitalism, which comes across as confirmation bias. So, it's understandable that people are questioning your removal of content from the article per your statements that the sources are not reliable, because per the above, it's unclear if you're familiar with identifying reliable sources for Wikipedia's purposes. North AmericaUser talk:Northamerica1000|1000;/font; 06:54, 8 January 2016 (UTC):::::::::You made a reasonable argument that #3 is an RS, noting things I hadn't seen. After looking closer at sources in the article, some of them do appear more reliable than my first impression indicated. There are still many sources in the article I do not think meet the requirements of a reliable source. Self published pro-Anarcho Capitalism material, for example. The article relies far too heavily on content from Anarcho Capitalists, in general. The result is a non-neutral article. We need to trim down the pro-Anarcho Capitalism sources and add neutral third party sources. EoT State (talk) 17:33, 8 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;Some of the examples cited above are clearly fine, but no 2 has rather obviously lifted the excerpt linked to from this very page. Much of the recent activity on the page has not been helpful, and has exaggerated the paucity of sources, but it has nonetheless highlighted the unsuitability of many of the sources currently used and hence of the material derived from them. Content should not be sourced to blogs or overreliant on anarcho-capitalist writings, which are arguably, in effect, primary sources and have an obvious bias – as noted above, that does not bar them, but it means they need to be used with caution and greater reliance placed on third-party analysis, esepcially academic writings on the topic (which do exist). If editors could assess each source and the derived content on its own terms, rather than reacting based on their views of other editors' activities and/or their own views on anarcho-capitalism, that would help, but it seems rather unlikely to happen. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';10:01, 8 January 2016 (UTC):''Political Ideology Today'' is a tertiary source, an introductory politics textbook, and therefore not an ideal source either.  There are no footnotes so if there are any disputes about what it says, there is no way to resolve it.  FreeKnowledgeCreator, if you suspect another editor of sockpuppetry, you should take it to SPI instead of discussing it here.  TFD (talk) 01:30, 9 January 2016 (UTC)how do we proceed?My edits to the article keep getting reverted, yet those reverting me are not participating in discussion here. How do we proceed? There appears to be consensus for removing at least some sources. It's not helping matters that the blatant POV pushers seem to think they are above consensus building and are content to simply tag-team revert any changes to the article. EoT State (talk) 03:38, 9 January 2016 (UTC);/strike;:First, I'd suggest you stop edit-warring over the content (as should others). Even if you are "right" or have a plausible case, it rarely gets you anywhere, not least because others will, as you have noticed, start knee-jerk reverting on the assumption you are up to no good, whether justified or not. Secondly, you should take on board that sources do not have to be "neutral". Equally, Self-published and primary sources are both acceptable, with some limitations and qualifications. The writings of Murray Rothbard and other notable anarcho-capitalists or anarcho-capitalist sympathisers for example can be cited, directly if necessary. That said, I can't quite believe that people are   this content back in for example, sourced to another wiki and a dead site of unclear repute respectively. But then we're back to the point about self-defeating actions. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';11:06, 9 January 2016 (UTC)Misleading and suspect ethnographic information.Whilst I cannot(and indeed do not have time) to research and correct much of the ethnographic 'information' presented in this article as examples 'similar to Anarcho-capitalism', the sections apparently detailing so called 'primitive' Papuan groups practicing some kind of 'private property' are flagrantly inaccurate. Whilst ideological disputes no doubt occur over the use of terms and the semantics of specific terms, this article contains anthropologically and ethnographically inaccurate and information misrepresentative of ethnographic accounts. Because of this, and because I am sure that correction of these failings is beyond the scope of this article, please somebody take out the supposed 'similar to Anarcho-capitalism' section all together.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/90.200.217.253|90.200.217.253 (talk) 04:19, 16 February 2016 (UTC);;; ;;: So.....you have admitted that you don't have time to research the "issue". And you have offered nothing other than your say-so. Ok. That's probably not going to work. If you or someone else could provide some substance to your claim, that'd be great. - Knight of BAAWA (talk) 23:53, 17 February 2016 (UTC)Actually, having read the ethnography cited(poorly) in the article, that being 'POSPISIL, L. (1965). A Formal Analysis of Substantive Law: Kapauku Papuan Laws of Land Tenure. American Anthropologist. 67, 186-214. ' I find no evidence of 'private property' as would be required for this to be used as evidence of anything 'similar to Anarcho-capitalism'. From an anthropological, or rather economic anthropological perspective, there is no evidence in this ethnography of anything that could be considered 'private property', indeed I highly doubt that Pospisil would have argued that this was the case, particular as such a concept scarcely exists in any 'non-Western' ethnographic examples. What is demonstrated in the ethnography, is various forms of personal ownership(as fundamentally distinct from private ownership), where by individuals possess specific discrete items or objects, a common trait found in other ethnographic examples see(Fred Myers on the Pintupi) alongside what put into Western language can only be called 'common ownership' however based upon the family and kin relationships. Even the examples cited demonstrate that kinship is the building block of concepts of ownership(Fred Myers again provides some information regarding this), and could only be translated into Western language as being akin to the personal possessions held in common by family members. However even this is a massive stretching of definitions since Western society does not have the social structures and kinship relations that are evident in Kapauku society and are form the basis of property ownership in that society. Such stretching of definitions risks the types of essentialising and oversimplification that comes with racism and colonialist ignorance. The Pospisil example cited, does not even provide evidence for private property, merely individual ownership, which cannot be reduced to being the same thing, and certainly not so when claiming some kind of anthropological credibility. The fact of the matter is that if we try to force Kapauku society into the frameworks of Western notions of property(a dubious task for sure) theirs is a society where individual ownership of land and land ownership in general, and resources are derived not through private property rights, but through the physical acts of individuals and indeed in most instances collective labour(see Pospisil) of kinship groups, who then claim ownership in common of the land or resources they have 'developed'.For further reading of all that's wrong with trying to claim that the Kapauku have 'private property', as well as why this does not make sense in an ethnographic context seeThe gift-Marcel MaussStone age economics-Marshall SahlinsDebt-David Graeberand why'll you're on it readArgonauts of the Western pacific-Malinowski.Coral gardens and their magic-Malinowski.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/90.200.217.253|90.200.217.253 (talk) 05:40, 18 February 2016 (UTC);;; ;;:And of course, equally, we only have the "say-so" of the IP editor who only recently added much of this content to the article that, by contrast, it is relevant and appropriate. The main source relied on is a paper by Bruce Benson published by the hardly disinterested Journal of Libertarian Studies which, nonetheless, doesn't even mention anarcho-capitalism in its body. It's not clear that any of the original anthropological source material, some of which is also quoted directly at some length, does either. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';11:29, 20 February 2016 (UTC)