GhostRiderX990 - Software definition- Software is a general term for the various kinds of programs used to operate computers and related devices. (The term hardware describes the physical aspects of computers and related devices.)Software can be thought of as the variable part of a computer and hardware the invariable part. Software is often divided into application software (programs that do work users are directly interested in) and system software (which includes operating systems and any program that supports application software). The term middleware is sometimes used to describe programming that mediates between application and system software or between two different kinds of application software (for example, sending a remote work request from an application in a computer that has one kind of operating system to an application in a computer with a different operating system).An additional and difficult-to-classify category of software is the utility, which is a small useful program with limited capability. Some utilities come with operating systems. Like applications, utilities tend to be separately installable and capable of being used independently from the rest of the operating system.By; Michael D-5 —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/125.60.241.19|125.60.241.19 (talk) 03:42, 23 July 2008 (UTC);;; ;;MergeI propose to merge this article into Software. They are the same stuff.--Kittyhawk2 (talk) 01:12, 10 January 2009 (UTC):Look like it was done around January 27, 2009.Has the merge been undone? I don't understand why the article is called 'computer software' Can there be any other kind of software important enough to require the word 'computer' added to 'software' in the title? It seems nonsense to me. If no one oposes in a reasonable time, I will transfer this article to software, and redirect 'computer software' to software. --User:Jasón|Jasón (User talk:Jasón|talk) 02:37, 29 December 2011 (UTC):Hi Jasón, since software is currently a redirect to this article, this will be a move. But article ''software'' has a revision history, so you will need help from an administrator to do this move (including his talk page). I suggest to use the procedure for requesting controversial and potentially controversial moves to get first feedback from a broader audience. More info can be found in Wikipedia:Requested moves. Thanks, SchreyP  (messages);08:10, 29 December 2011 (UTC)A mild modification neededOnce a user searches for software, it redirects to computer software. But today, software pertains to computers as well as PDAs, Mobiles, Electronics, etc. Having the entire topic be based on just computer software is just not right. I had made a separate section for software for the very purpose hoping that would happen, but it was reverted. I propose that a separate page be created defining what a software is and the remaining be made as sub classifications. It would then be much more well organised as well as informative.:Well those things have computers in them too, so I do not see the distinction. It is the computer in the device that runs the software. We should mention consumer electronics as having more and more software though, and "Apps" as being the slang for application software. W Nowicki (talk) 00:32, 6 June 2010 (UTC):Category:Software by countryI think such a category is needed and missing from :Category:Software. Thoughts? --Piotr Konieczny aka Prokonsul Piotrus|User_talk:Piotrus| talk ;/font; 23:37, 25 October 2009 (UTC)History sectionThe history section is totally unsourced, redundant, and contains factual errors. Not sure if we should just remove it for now. W Nowicki (talk) 19:09, 5 June 2010 (UTC)From my point of view this section is very poor, specially if compared to the articles about the history of free and open-source software and the history of computing hardware. In logic terms, free and open-source software are a subset of software, and there should be a full article on software history which also included the history of free and open-source SW. Unfortunately I'm not an expert to carry out the task, but I'm sure there is enough expertise out there.--User:Jasón|Jasón (User talk:Jasón|talk) 18:51, 27 December 2011 (UTC)I agree, the history section seems totally wrong.  It seems to claim that software was only available from OEMs untilthe advent of the PC.  However, I believe games were available for the AppleII and similar, and programs like Unix and Emacs pre-date the IBM PC (just checked!)   My prof says he used a package such as SPSS or something on the mainframes, and it was sold by the software vendor, not the OEM.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Snydersware (talk • Special:Contributions/Snydersware|contribs) 19:15, 22 April 2012 (UTC);;; ;;"Bottomless Data Compression"I have finished my program that will compress forever without error. "Bottomless Data Compression" or "Infinity to one" compression, so to speak. Who do I demonstrate this to so that I may be sourced here without loss of the intellectual property rights?  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/71.114.2.163|71.114.2.163 (talk) 17:35, 10 February 2011 (UTC);; ;;: May I suggest that you first look at Lossless data compression, in particular the section on 'Limitations', which contains a claim (with reference) that such "infinity to one" compression is impossible. Murray Langton (talk) 22:23, 10 February 2011 (UTC)::I have been running this "program" for several weeks now and not one bit is off. It is not your typical data compressor. It is more a function of the mechanical distribution of random binary than typical software manipulation. Data does not equal mass. It will simply compress any form of binary data presented, including its own output. It will compress the most randomized binary possible even in its "native random state" not just patterned data output from typical computers. I've worked on it for over thirty years and this was my 283rd try, all the others did fail, eventually but not this one.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/71.114.2.163|71.114.2.163 (talk) 23:23, 10 February 2011 (UTC);; ;;::The limitations described at your article specify "Lossless data compression algorithms cannot guarantee compression for all input data sets." This compressor, indeed may be presented certain types of data that it may not compress on the first pass but will on the second or third after the change of the compression function, inherent in the program occurs.fa:نرم افزار کامپیوتر  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/31.56.40.230|31.56.40.230 (talk) 06:46, 6 July 2011 (UTC);; ;;Ah, compressing by a factor of infinity is easy. Just take all the data in and produce none in return (for example, crash). I have written some programs like that, as I suppose every early student in computer science. The hard part is getting the data back out! Does make a good joke, and might mention if there is a source. W Nowicki (talk) 17:40, 6 July 2011 (UTC)Non-Encyclopedic PhraseThe article reads:"It is hard to imagine today that people once felt that software was worthless without a machine."This may be true for some people -- but equally, it maybe be untrue for other people.  In any case, the phrase "hard to imagine" is highly subjective and un-encyclopedic, and should be re-written or removed.Karl gregory jones (talk) 20:38, 13 December 2011 (UTC):I concur it should be removed, although for the much simpler reason that it sounds puerile. --Coolcaesar (talk) 08:53, 16 December 2011 (UTC)--M4gnum0n (talk) 10:22, 12 June 2012 (UTC)Requested move: Computer software → Software;;:''The following discussion is an archived discussion of a requested move. '''Please do not modify it.''' Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on the talk page. No further edits should be made to this section. ''The result of the move request was: '''moved to Software'''. Favonian (talk) 18:41, 5 January 2012 (UTC)----Computer software →  – Is there any other kind of software important enough to require the word 'computer' added to 'software' in the article's title? (I don't thing that clothing qualifies). As already mentioned in this talk page, software requires a computer to run, so there is no need to explicitly mention it. But most important of all, nobody talks about 'computer software' but rather about 'software'. The current name seems quite awkward and unjustified to me. Am I missing any rationale for NOT changing it? Thanks. User:Jasón|Jasón (User talk:Jasón|talk) 14:53, 29 December 2011 (UTC)* '''Support''' I also don't see directly a reason why ''software'' should be prefixed by ''computer''. -- SchreyP  (messages);16:07, 29 December 2011 (UTC)* '''Comment''' it depends on how restrictive a term this is. Does Microcode, Firmware, FPGA coding, etc count as software or not... Special:Contributions/76.65.128.132|76.65.128.132 (talk) 08:09, 30 December 2011 (UTC)* '''Support'''. This top-level article can easily address related topics like firmware and microcode in a section, and calling it computer software wouldn't segregate it from those anyway. Among the other uses of software it's obviously the primary topic. I ordinarily don't cite category titles in mainspace move discussions (because category titles are usually based on articles, not vice versa) but I'll point out that Software has been so named since 2004, despite the general use of unambiguous titles in that namespace. –Pnm (talk) 21:03, 30 December 2011 (UTC)* '''Support''' Unnecessary disambiguation. —''Ruud'' 23:34, 1 January 2012 (UTC)*'''Support'''.  Possibly the oldest unnecessary disambiguation in the encyclopedia.  Powers T;;01:57, 3 January 2012 (UTC):''The above discussion is preserved as an archive of a requested move.  '''Please do not modify it.''' Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on this talk page. No further edits should be made to this section.;/div;;;Software Management?Why isn't "Software Management" even mentioned in this article? --Alien4 (talk) 16:59, 18 February 2013 (UTC): Added link to Software asset management, although it might not be completely the same. --Alien4 (talk) 09:30, 10 September 2015 (UTC)Software TopicsMight I suggest a "Theory" subcategory under software topics? Software has now evolved to exist as a part of technology that is currently being studied in-depth by academics. Wendy Chun's "On Software, or the Persistence of Visual Knowledge" is one such example. She writes, "Software perpetuates certain notions of seeing as knowing, of reading and readaibility that were supposed to have faded with the waning of indexicality. It does so by mimicking both ideology and ideology critique, by conflating executable with execution, program with process, order with action." Another work of hers, "Invisibly Visible, Visibly Invisible", is also of note. Taylor Bohl (talk) 18:53, 7 March 2013 (UTC):You clearly don't know much about the study of software, otherwise you'd know that there are at least two fields that would better come under "Theory" - computer science and software engineering. And I'm afraid I think this is a clear case where your proposed material for inclusion is so obscure in the context of the overall topic that it should not be covered in this article at all. There is precedent for this view.--greenrd (talk) 20:46, 21 September 2013 (UTC)Significant rewriting and restructing underwayThis article was really bad and read like a mismash of several different textbooks, some from the 1990s - the lead was too long, certain statements were outdated or simply wrong, and there was an amazing amount of repetition, the like of which I've never seen anywhere else on Wikipedia. I am presently rewriting and reworking parts of the article.--greenrd (talk) 18:22, 21 September 2013 (UTC)Definition of softwareI see that a previous merge request for this article with Computer program was rejected. However the article starts out by saying that software is also known as computer programs, and the computer program article does the same in reverse. If they are the same, then the articles should be merged, and if they are not the same, then the articles shouldn't say that they are. It seems to me that the difference is that software includes libraries, which aren't  programs because they don't have a single entry point. However other files types such as documentation files and audio files, are not computer software, even if they are shipped as part of an operating system. Horatio (talk) 10:44, 20 May 2014 (UTC)According to the definition of software in the article, "ANY set of machine readable instructions that directs a computer's processor to perform specific operations" qualifies as software.  This would make computer programs a subset of software, only if they direct the processor of a computer to perform specific operations.  According to the definition, documentation files, audio files, as well as computer programs can only be considered as software if they direct a computer's processor to perform specific operations.  However, if they don't direct a computer's processor to perform specific operations, the set of machine readable instructions is not software.  This means, according to the definition, that a compact disc that contains binary values in a machine readable format, that thanks to our pervasive von neumann architecture, can be considered to be software when it actually directs the cpu.  It is important to keep in mind that software can exist in these types of binary blobs, and that these binary blobs can be positioned to direct the cpu to operate according to the instructions provided.  If we fail to keep in mind that a specially crafted data file can exploit a buffer overflow in the code that handles the data, causing what we normally think of as data to become instructions, we will find ourselves rooted by those who do keep this in mind.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/23.126.215.162|23.126.215.162 (talk) 10:29, 23 January 2015 (UTC);;; ;;Section on "three layers of software" taken from "Information Technology in Business", by Amir ManzoorI just noticed that a large section of this page is a direct rewrite of a passage from the book "Information Technology in Business", by Amir Manzoor. The section on the "three layers of software" (platform, application and user-written software) is basically this text: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=b5x_NHo5g2oC;pg=PA144;lpg=PA144;dq=%22three+layers%22+of+%22user+software%22;source=bl;ots=rc7NCLACoS;sig=S6OluKj4eERI6sh4Ybkosol806U;hl=en;sa=X;ei=NxPBVL39IYOL7Abo7IGIAQ;ved=0CDAQ6AEwAg#v=onepage;q=%22three%20layers%22%20of%20%22user%20software%22;f=falseThis section specifically:"User-Centric Software Classification-Layered ApproachPeople using modem general-purpose computers see computer software differently than a computer programmer. For them, the computer software can be divided into three layers each performing a variety of tasks. 'Fhese three layers are platform, application, and user software.Platform SoftwareThis software allows a user to interact with the computer and its peripherals. Platform software includes firmware, device drivers, and operating system.Application SoftwareWhen a common user thinks of the software, it is generally the application software. Application software is independent programs from the operating system. Typical examples of application software are office suites and video games. Application software is generally purchased separately from the computer hardware, but they may be bundled with the computer.USER-WRITTEN SOFTWAREUser-written software is created by users and caters to the specific requirements from the users. Examples of user-written software are spreadsheet templates, word processor macros, scientific simulations, and scripts for graphics and animations."I am new to Wikipedia, so please be gentle. Shouldn’t this be mentioned in the "References" section? I wanted to do it myself, but don't know how yet. Michael Beijer (talk) 15:25, 22 January 2015 (UTC)'''Evaluation on the Wikipedia page of Software.'''1.There should be more citations included so as to help provide verification and enhance the reliability of the article, so that it can be more widely used among Wikipedia users.2. There are footnotes included that are accurate and it brings the user to the relevant pages if the users require more information on what Wikipedia has provided them with.3. References are included and this increases credibility of the information posted in the article.Evaluation done by Ai Wey and Jass for AB1401.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Jasslimhuimin (talk • Special:Contributions/Jasslimhuimin|contribs) 11:15, 25 March 2015 (UTC);;; ;;