;;Wrong way round?It says in the introduction that "Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne", but surely it should be "Batman is the secret identity of Bruce Wayne", shouldn't it? Special:Contributions/86.152.162.152|86.152.162.152 (talk) 01:29, 18 July 2015 (UTC):Pretty sure it doesn't matter. They're both the secret identity of each other. Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne and Bruce Wayne's secret identity is Batman. —DangerousJXD (talk) 07:56, 18 July 2015 (UTC)::(OP) Looking at this once more, I still believe it is more logical for Batman to be the "secret identity". Special:Contributions/109.152.147.116|109.152.147.116 (talk) 13:51, 18 July 2015 (UTC):::You can go ahead and change it if you want; both are correct. I think the way it is now is fine because the article is titled "Batman", not "Bruce Wayne". As I said though, it doesn't matter. —DangerousJXD (talk) 22:05, 18 July 2015 (UTC):::Neither identity is a secret. People know that Bruce Wayne exists, and people know that Batman exists. The secret is the fact that one is the identity of the other, and that secret applies both ways. Each identity, therefore, has equal claim to the "secret" title. Daniel J. Hakimi (talk) 20:22, 23 November 2015 (UTC)::::Exactly. —DangerousJXD (talk) 21:54, 17 December 2015 (UTC)Matches MaloneMatches Malone redirects here. In the comics, Malone was a small time criminal who was killed early in Batman's career. Batman adopted Malone's identity as a disguise, and still uses the identity when undercover in comic books to this day. Considering that Malone is a redirect to this article, shouldn't we create a small section explaining who Malone was and why Batman uses that alias? '''Dark'''Knight'''Special:Contributions/Darkknight2149|2149''' 05:59, 25 November 2015 (UTC):There is a brief mention of Matches Malone in the "Skills and abilities" section and the infobox lists Matches Malone as an alias with a reference. I think that's a decent enough explanation as to who Matches Malone is but I agree it could probably go into a little more detail as to how exactly Matches Malone fits into Batman. —DangerousJXD (talk) 22:09, 17 December 2015 (UTC)Batman's superpowersDC lists Batman's "powers" as "exceptional martial artist, combat strategy, inexhaustible wealth, brilliant deductive skill, advanced technology"Special:Contributions/71.233.28.85|71.233.28.85 (talk) 00:25, 2 December 2015 (UTC):None of those are superpowers. I still say the section here should say "none." Daniel J. Hakimi (talk) 16:48, 11 February 2016 (UTC)Live-action adaptationsDavid Mazouz was listed as playing "Batman" in the last sentence of the last lead paragraph, because he plays a young Bruce Wayne on the TV show ''Gotham''. As I see it, this actor is not playing the costumed-persona that is Batman. Rather, he is playing a young Bruce Wayne, and we have never seen him in the Batman costume. Therefore, we should list him as someone who has played Batman onscreen. If we're to list child actors playing Bruce, then we should list all the child actors who played him in all the Joe Chill murder scene adaptations on film. I don't think we should be listing any of these child actors who have only played a young Bruce Wayne and never the costumed superhero that is Batman. Furthermore, until the actor actually appears in costume, which he may or may not, it is inappropriate to list him as playing Batman. What are editors thoughts on this? DrRNC (talk) 05:21, 24 December 2015 (UTC):I agree. To list David Mazouz as an actor who has played Batman is misleading. David Mazouz may be Bruce Wayne, but he has not yet been Batman. Fortdj33 (talk) 06:09, 24 December 2015 (UTC)::I would include him in the list, as it is the same character being portrayed. The scope of this article covers both Batman and Bruce Wayne. We could list him separately as portraying only Bruce Wayne, but I don't think that is necessary. We wouldn't include children appearing in flashbacks, not because they aren't playing the same character, but because they have very brief screen time.--Trystan (talk) 15:31, 24 December 2015 (UTC):::Trystan, it's a double standard if we list him and not the other actors to play a Bruce Wayne in live-action adaptations. To make it an issue of screen time is subjective. As Fortdj33 mentioned, it is misleading, because he does not play Batman, the costumed superhero this article is about. If the article was entitled "Bruce Wayne", then it would be a different issue — by the way, there is a Clark Kent article completely separate from the Superman article. If we are to include Mazouz, it should be in a separate section, not in the lead, stating that he plays Bruce Wayne only before he becomes Batman. In that lead paragraph, we have a list of actors who have suited up as Batman, complete with the costume and their own take on Batman's body language and voice, and then we have David Mazouz in that same list? An actor who never played Batman the superhero and only plays a young Bruce Wayne? That doesn't fit at all. DrRNC (talk) 01:51, 25 December 2015 (UTC)::::For reasons heavily detailed in the same discussion at User talk:Darkknight2149#Batman, I do believe we should include him. '''Dark'''Knight'''Special:Contributions/Darkknight2149|2149''' 02:05, 25 December 2015 (UTC)::::: As for the other child actors who play child Bruce Wayne, we shouldn't include them because they are not the primary actors who portray Batman in those films. For example, kid Bruce in ''Batman Begins'' only portrays a younger version of Christian Bale's character in that film for brief flashbacks. Christian Bale is the Batman of that film. In ''Gotham'', David Mazouz is the Bruce Wayne for the show. Not to mention that the character is already developing his Batman traits and is confirmed to put on that suit in the final episode of the series, if the series makes it that far (citations for this are listed at my Talk Page). The entire premise of ''Gotham'' is to be an origin story for Batman. Batman and Bruce Wayne are one in the same, and Bruce Wayne redirects here. '''Dark'''Knight'''Special:Contributions/Darkknight2149|2149''' 02:12, 25 December 2015 (UTC):I think it's worth mentioning him in the article, but not in the lead. Argento Surfer (talk) 13:39, 28 December 2015 (UTC)::I agree with Argento Surfer. It can be stated elsewhere in the article, but does not belong in the lead, as he is not playing Batman the costumed superhero but rather a young Bruce Wayne. DrRNC (talk) 04:47, 31 December 2015 (UTC):::Concur. The character is not yet Batman. And unless the series lasts another eight or so years, he never is going to become Batman. Mentioning that he plays Bruce Wayne is fine, but it's misleading to suggest, by virtue of placement in the lead, that he is one of the actors who has played Batman. --Tenebrae (talk) 21:37, 31 December 2015 (UTC)::::The consensus is quite clear. I'll remove his name from the lead, while still mentioning his role as a young Bruce Wayne in the body of the article. DrRNC (talk) 03:23, 4 January 2016 (UTC)Alex Ross artI noticed that Superman has had his infobox image changed to one of Alex Ross' pieces of work, now the previous was done by Jim Lee and of course that images serves as a companion piece to the current image used on Batman's page, and the new Superman image also has it's own Batman counterpart , so may I suggest that the Ross image become Batman's next infobox picture. If it helps any, the same has also been done to Wonder Woman's page as well. Teridax122 (talk) 07:01, 19 February 2016 (UTC):I would oppose this change. I think the image being used now is ''superior'' to the one you're suggesting it be changed to. For the Superman change, I think those two pictures (the current one and the one that was used before) are both fine. With these two Batman pictures, in my opinion, one is dreadful, and one is fine. I don't recall the Wonder Woman image that was used before the current one. As for the current Wonder Woman image, it's fine. When you compare the current Wonder Woman, current Superman, and proposed new Batman images, I think the Batman one is nowhere near as good as the others. As I said, I think it's just awful. Everyone has their own preferences. Also, don't worry about other stuff. —DangerousJXD (talk) 07:35, 19 February 2016 (UTC):: I wouldn't mind changing it for the sake of consistency. However, the current picture is also fine, so either way works for me. I think that @DrRNC may have something to say on this matter. '''Dark'''Knight'''Special:Contributions/Darkknight2149|2149''' 14:07, 19 February 2016 (UTC):I, too, oppose this change. The Wonder Woman image was changed because the previous image didn't show her full costume, as her body was positioned at an angle. The previous Superman image was changed for a similar reason. It showed Superman's profile, and the outfit itself was largely draped in shadows. The costume and its colors were obscured, with the "S" logo barely identifiable. Using Lee's Superman image to simply match his Batman image didn't have much logic to it, especially with the Ross image being of such superior quality. The current Wonder Woman and Superman images by Ross reveal their full costumes and represent their iconic forms. The current Batman image by Lee represents his costume quite well. The bat logo is identifiable, the costume is visible, and the colors are accurate. The other issue is Ross' Batman image itself. The Ross Wonder Woman and Superman images not only relate to the classic look they have in the comics, especially the Golden Age, but are also reminiscent of the serials, TV shows, and movies. This is mainly because the look of these two characters haven't varied too much across mediums. Ross' take on these two characters accurately sums up their looks throughout the years and showcases their costumes in exceptionally high quality images. But Batman's costume in the Ross image doesn't evoke the Batman image we see in the comics. The colors are off and Ross is using artistic license to take a very realistic approach to Batman. Also, his physicality is not well represented in that image. The Superman image by Ross shows him to be very muscular. However, from the few glimpses of his body that we do see, Ross' Batman appears to be lacking in muscularity. Furthermore, the image itself does not reveal the costume the way the Wonder Woman and Superman images do. His cape is concealing too much of the costume and the bat logo is not identifiable. Therefore, the current Jim Lee image of Batman is a better representation of the character. DrRNC (talk) 06:17, 22 February 2016 (UTC)::You crushed the nail on the head. This might very well be the greatest comment I have ever seen. —DangerousJXD (talk) 06:26, 22 February 2016 (UTC)::: Since we all seem to be in agreement, I'll just cap this off by reiterating that I'm fine with either image. Jim Lee captures the mood and feel of the Batman mythos while Alex Ross' image captures the realism. If there are no objections, then Jim Lee it is. '''Dark'''Knight'''Special:Contributions/Darkknight2149|2149''' 14:38, 22 February 2016 (UTC)