Reorganising the articleIn my opinion the article in its present form does not possess sufficient structure, covering biomolecules in too much detail and in an illogical way - e.g. 2 separate sections on proteins, while only treating metabolism in a small section under carbohydrates, and with very little on gene expression/regulation etc.. In addition it largely lacks any in-line referencing.I've copied the article to a user page and am currently experimenting with a fairly substantial reorganisation, please feel free to User:PiFanatic/biochemistry|check it out and discuss your thoughts on it. PiFanatic (talk) 19:05, 16 January 2011 (UTC)History Refferencealchemy  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Drrake (talk • Special:Contributions/Drrake|contribs) 09:22, 4 August 2010 (UTC);;; ;;MCOTF:Suggestions hereLooking over the article, here are some of my suggestions:*the first line- biochemistry is the chemistry of life - a bit vague, isnt it? How about ''Biochemistry is the name given to a hybrid branch of chemistry which specialises in the chemical processes in living organisms....''*subdisciplines section- I dont think it is just these topics that are covered - biochemistry is divided either into many topics such as carbs, proteins etc ~(+MANY more such as hormonal), or into cellular and molecular biochemistry. There is significant overlap with physiological disciplines.*More relevance to medical and zoological topics - introduction of topics like "pharmacology" or "toxicology".What do you guys think?PhatRita 15:18, 31 August 2005 (UTC):''Merriam-Webster'' defines it as "chemistry that deals with the chemical compounds and processes occurring in organisms". How about something like "Biochemistry is the chemistry of life, a bridge between biology and chemistry that studies how complex chemical reactions give rise to life. It is a hybrid branch of chemistry which specialises in the chemical processes in living organisms." Just writing that off the top of my head in the middle of the night. ;mdash; Knowledge Seeker User talk:Knowledge Seeker|;#2470; 05:26, September 1, 2005 (UTC)::Yes!  That is a much more captivating introduction. Cybergoth 04:16, 2 September 2005 (UTC)Regarding the Relationship to other "molecular-scale" biological sciences section:*I would suggust using the term molecular genetics rather than "genetics".  It is more specific to the "molecular scale" of biochemisty. Cybergoth 04:21, 2 September 2005 (UTC)**I wasn't sure where you wanted this change, Cybergoth; why don't you go ahead and change it yourself;mdash;I agree with your suggestion. ;mdash; Knowledge Seeker User talk:Knowledge Seeker|;#2470; 04:17, September 5, 2005 (UTC)I've started to expand this article, but there are a couple areas I'll need help on. I'll try to do some reading, but my memory of non-human biochemistry is pretty shaky;mdash;I barely remember the Calvin cycle and light and dark reactions and such; my microbial biochemistry is very weak too. Also, I may need some help with lipids;mdash;we'll see. Feel free to rewrite the sections I'm doing. Am I putting too much/too little in? ;mdash; Knowledge Seeker User talk:Knowledge Seeker|;#2470; 06:25, September 5, 2005 (UTC)Micheal E. Sugar ?is this a real person or just vandalism?Today, there are three main types of biochemistry as established by Michael E. Sugar.;/i;mathew (talk) 01:03, 3 May 2009 (UTC)I concur.  I'm removing the reference, unless anyone has any serious objections.Jhay116 (talk) 20:13, 15 June 2009 (UTC)TrainingIt would be interesting to have a section on training, similar to what's been added to articles about medical subspecialties. Jack Daw 18:37, 13 March 2007 (UTC)MetabolismThe article metabolism is to a large extent an introduction to biochemistry and contains much more info on biochemistry than the present article does. therefore I think it should be more clearly highlighted here. --Etxrge (talk) 16:45, 5 December 2007 (UTC)Animal BiochemistryThe article Animal Biochemistry could become a redirect or even deleted or what ever, but it is giving noting new! Somebody should get ride of it Template:Unsigned --; ;;Current Topics in BiochemistryThe article doesn’t address any current issues dealt with in the field of biochemistry. I feel as though it would be greatly enhanced if some of the big issues could be added to it in order to give an understanding of the impact of biochemistry on the world. These wouldn’t necessarily need to be very in depth, so long as a link was provided to another Wikipedia page discussing the topic.  Taking information directly from the Wikipedia main pages and having them listed here would help alert the reader to the topics. Some important ones may include:Stem Cells (Main page: Stem Cells)Stem cells are cells found in most, if not all, multi-cellular organisms. They are characterized by the ability to renew themselves through mitotic cell division and differentiating into a diverse range of specialized cell types. Stem cell therapy is thought to be a way to help repair damaged tissues.However, there exists a widespread controversy over human embryonic stem cell research that emanates from the techniques used in the creation and usage of stem cells. Opponents of the research argue that embryonic stem cell technologies are a slippery slope to reproductive cloning and can fundamentally devalue human life. Those in the pro-life movement argue that a human embryo is a human life and is therefore entitled to protection. Contrarily, supporters of embryonic stem cell research argue that such research should be pursued because the resultant treatments could have significant medical potential. It is also noted that excess embryos created for in vitro fertilization could be donated with consent and used for the research.Anabolic Steroid Use (Main page: Anabolic Steroid)Performance enhancing substances have been used for thousands of years in traditional medicine by societies around the world, with the aim of promoting vitality and strength. Anabolic steroids have been used by men and women in many different kinds of professional sports to attain a competitive edge or to assist in recovery from injury. Such use is prohibited by the rules of the governing bodies of many sports. Anabolic steroid use occurs among adolescents, especially by those participating in competitive sports. It has been suggested that the prevalence of use among high-school students in the U.S. may be as high as 2.7%. Male students used anabolic steroids more frequently than female students and, on average, those who participated in sports used steroids more often than those who did not.Sammich117 (talk) 05:59, 3 June 2008 (UTC)Spam linkThe external link reference to the Protein Zone seems to be a site selling books on proteins.Special:Contributions/65.4.1.40|65.4.1.40 (talk) 00:04, 26 January 2009 (UTC):Removed. Tim Vickers (talk) 00:32, 26 January 2009 (UTC)SuggestionsI didn't want to unceremoniously trash Suzanne's text for thisarticle (taken from BioChemistry), so I'm putting it hereso that she or others may incorporate it in this page asappropriate --dja----Biochemistry considers the chemical properties of biological systems.Formally, biochemistry includes a description of the macromolecules,including proteins, lipids, polysaccharides, and :nucleicacids|nucleicacids, and small molecules present in cells.  The bulk of biochemicalinvestigation focuses on the properties of proteins, many of which areenzymes.  For historical reasons, the biochemistry ofmetabolism has been one of the most extensively described aspect of thecell.----have hopefully incorporated above material appropriatelly-- sodiumWilhelm Schuessler''There seems to be no reference whatsoever to Dr. Wilhelm Schuessler, who discovered the 12 essential mineral elements of which the body is both composed and requires for life.  Schuessler was a German Scientist, homoeopath and Medical Doctor who lived in Oldenburg Germany ( 1821 - 1898 )and considered the father of Biochemistry having worked with many such as Rudolf Virchow (cellular pathology)  The first biochemic association was founded in Oldenburg on July 17th 1885.The Institute of Biochemistry (Schuessler) Biochemischer Bund Deutschland (Ev) is still "alive and well" with web page at www.biochemie-online.de Further information may be obtained in the English language by contacting The Institute of Biochemic medicine (Asia Pacific) A branch of the Biochemischer Bund Deutschland - which is located in Australia biochemics@bigpond.com.au'': ''(removed from article --jag123 10:42, 28 Apr 2005 (UTC))''This article lacks directionI think this article  would give non-biochemists a slightly misleading notion of what the subject is about. The article jumps straight into detail about lipids and carbohydrates and fails to give a clear outline of what modern biochemistry as opposed to old school biochemistry is really about. Lets not forget that the focus of the subject has changed markedly over its history.I think it would be really important to point out that biochemistry now underpins all life sciences from plant science to medicine and therefore all life science subjects are now effectively branches of biochemistry. Thus biochemistry has become a victim of its own success with all life science subjects involved in their own biochemical research. Biochemistry's own area of investigation now mainly lies with the processes that go on within living cells  and is essentially the same as molecular cell biology.Tom the biochemist (talk) 18:31, 3 June 2010 (UTC)I think the article definitely needs some work as regards structure and content. I don't think 'monomers and polymers' really does justice to the depth of the subject. A fairly substantial rewrite might be necessary for some parts. The article should ideally give an overview of what is covered by the subject and how it links in to other disciplines, while leaving the fine detail to more specific pages. PiFanatic (talk) 18:24, 16 January 2011 (UTC)Seemingly Magical?I think the 'seemingly magical phenomenon of life' in the first paragraph sounds a bit woolly, perhaps something like 'incredible complexity of life' or similar would be better?PiFanatic (talk) 18:44, 18 November 2010 (UTC)this is more like a C-class article...no discussion of experiments and methodsThese sections are relevant to the topic of biochemistry, but biochemistry is also a discipline, i.e. a profession. How the Krebs cycle was elucidated or how the Hershey-Chase experiment was carried out, and basically the tools available to a biochemist should take up half of this article. Special:Contributions/216.197.66.61|216.197.66.61 (talk) 03:04, 22 March 2012 (UTC)Needs rewritingAs others noted, this article is poor. Biochemistry is not just describing carbohydrates or proteins, most of what's written here can go into their own individual pages (and why would there be two separate sections each for protein, carbohydrate, lipids and nucleic acids anyway?)  What's needed here is a broad view of biochemistry as a discipline, its concepts, practices and applications.  It would need extensive rewrite, I'm not sure if I can do it, but I'll probably give it a go some time, and work through it slowly.  A lot of what's currently here will be deleted as they can be linked to their own pages. Hzh (talk) 20:17, 28 July 2015 (UTC): I've started by merging duplicate sections, the rest of the rewrite will come later.  Those who want to contribute are welcome to do so.Hzh (talk) 13:12, 29 July 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Biochemistry. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/16/3/2672/pdf*Added archiveWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;07:42, 27 February 2016 (UTC)