Semi-protected edit request on 6 December 2015;;Paragraph for minor editing:Several rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, such as the Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale.[61] The use of evaluation scales can not substitute a full clinical interview but they serve to systematize the recollection of symptoms.[61] On the other hand, instruments for the screening of bipolar disorder have low sensitivity[clarification needed] and limited diagnostic validity.[61]Comments:I am a new editor and these are minor but significant editing suggestions. I hope I am submitting them correctly. If not, please advise on how I should do such things in future.This last sentence in this paragraph simply calls for clarification of statistical/methodological terms. As a psychologist (not a clinician, however), as a methodologist [and as a lifelong but fairly recently diagnosed bipolar], I believe (1) you are referring to statistical reliability instead of low sensitivity. Low or high reliability refers to whether a measure of a trait (in this case, a measure of bipolar characteristics) yields a dissimilar or similar result each time that test (or another statistically valid version of the test) is taken by a sample of individuals drawn from the same population of patients. In simple terms, someone who is bipolar should have about the same score on the test each time he/she takes it. Low reliability refers to a measure that yields inconsistent results; high reliability clearly refers to a test that produces consistent results across testings.[This is no doubt difficult to measure given the fluid nature of mood swings.] However, from personal experience, after being given one of these measures I could distinguish actions that were typical of the "trait" aspects of my bipolar disorder vs. the "state" aspects. This is likely to be part of the measurement reliability problem. I would suggest you refer to a section on "measurement reliability" or "personality measurement" to explain this issue further.The other measurement problem is validity and there are four types: face validity, criterion validity, statistical validity, and construct validity. The latter is relevant here since I assume you are using "limited diagnostic validity" to refer to low construct validity. Construct validity simply refers to whether an instrument measures the underlying theoretical idea that it purports to measure. I think it might be best to just expand that part of the sentence to "limited diagnostic or low construct validity" with a link to a section on "construct validity" or on the four types of validity.DrSatine (talk) 02:26, 6 December 2015 (UTC)Please change:Several rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, such as the Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale.[61] The use of evaluation scales can not substitute a full clinical interview but they serve to systematize the recollection of symptoms.[61] On the other hand, instruments for the screening of bipolar disorder have low sensitivity[clarification needed] and limited diagnostic validity.[61]toSeveral rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, such as the Bipolar Spectrum Diagnostic Scale.[61] The use of evaluation scales cannot substitute for an in-depth clinical interview but they serve to help systematize the recollection of symptoms.[61] On the other hand, instruments for screening bipolar disorder have low reliability [link] and low construct validity [link] and are therefore of limited diagnostic value.[61]DrSatine (talk) 02:38, 6 December 2015 (UTC);;DrSatine (talk) 02:26, 6 December 2015 (UTC)*File:Padlock-silver-open.svg|28px|link= '''Not done:''' According to the page's protection level you should be able to edit the page yourself. If you seem to be unable to, please reopen the request with further details.;; --Stabila711 (talk) 08:37, 6 December 2015 (UTC)General comments on medications and treatmentIn my opinion, and as a bipolar patient, I believe too much emphasis is given to lithium as a drug of choice for mood swings. I was unable to tolerate lithium the several times that it was prescribed for me. Also, topiramate should be added as one of the anti-epileptics that can be effective for many bipolar patients.I would also like to see a section on medication side effects. Theses are not insignificant and restrict medication choices for many bipolar patients. I cannot tolerate most of the anti-epileptics (lamictal, depakote, trileptal, etc.) due to problems with edema, rash, and hair loss. There also are age-related problems with the atypical anti-psychotics including dystonic reactions and increasing chances, as with schizophrenia, of tardive dyskinesia (although the atypical antipsychotics are safer than their predecessors). Ongoing medication management is absolutely essential for bipolars; a drug combo that works at time A may become ineffective at time B. Time B may be just the next mood swing, which may be as soon as a few weeks down the road. Individuals with rapid cycles or mixed moods need much more frequent attention to medication changes than individuals with "classic" bipolar mood swings. Living with bipolar disorder is a full-time job.Some reference should be made to just how much of a disruption this disease can make of someone's life which I assume can be connected to a page on how difficult it is to manage one's life, marriage, family, and work with chronic illnesses, including mental illness, physical illness, and etc. Resources available to bipolars at the community, state, and national level also might be mentioned. Treatment modalities include more than just meds, private care, and inpatient treatment. Family education is also extremely important.Just my 6 cents worth....DrSatine (talk) 02:52, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::We based on content on high quality sources generally. User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 08:47, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::DrSatine I am a psychiatrist - you are right about ongoing medication and there should be a secondary source available for that somewhere. We go on secondary sources (review articles) for content to give us the best chance of consensus - I have not heard nor seen of material that supports the idea that medication may be effective at different times. If you have seen that please post. Agree about hte impact, again there should be sources that cover that. Cas Liber (talk '''·''' Special:Contributions/Casliber|contribs) 09:45, 6 December 2015 (UTC):*The amount of quality literature on the subject is surprisingly low considering the number of people with bipolar disorder.  Having lost more than one friend who had bipolar disorder to suicide, I've put some serious time into studying it, searching for support groups (there are none where I live, a metro area of over 1 million people), and the like.  While we know it is genetic, but it hasn't been studied enough.  Like virtually all mental disorders, the average general practitioner is often obvious to the symptoms, which is why most bipolar patients go undiagnosed and untreated.  It's a catch 22 for Wikipedia, as we can only publish what has been researched and written about.  User:Dennis Brown|Dennis Brown;/b; - User talk:Dennis Brown|2;cent;;/b; 12:36, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::*works both ways. I spend a significant amount of time taking folks off medication too (i.e. folks wrongly diagnosed with  an Axis I illness). Cas Liber (talk '''·''' Special:Contributions/Casliber|contribs) 12:15, 7 December 2015 (UTC)Semi-protected edit request on 20 December 2015;;;;The caption "Bipolar disorder is characterized by transitions between depression and mania" is inaccurate. Bipolar disorder isn't characterized by the transitions, but by the episodes themselves, which do not necessarily immediately follow one another, as stated in the article. I'd say "Bipolar disorder is characterized by episodes of depression and mania interspersed with normal periods.";;ClaudiaCrowley (talk) 20:11, 20 December 2015 (UTC)::Agree thanks User:ClaudiaCrowley User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 23:33, 20 December 2015 (UTC)WordingI do not see this as an improvement"'''Bipolar disorder''', also known as '''bipolar affective disorder''', or less formally as '''manic depression''', is a mental disorder characterized by periods of disordered mood involving alternating, or co-occurring elevated depressed moods."The lead is a summary. Thus the addition of "less formally" can go in the body of the text.I do not know what "co-occurring elevated depressed moods" means User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 06:18, 31 December 2015 (UTC):I agree. The current wording of the first sentence is more clear. Your comment called my attention to this article though and now I'm noticing that I don't love the simplified explanation of mania in the lead, "During mania an individual feels or acts abnormally happy, energetic, or irritable." To me, that perpetuates the common misconceptions of bipolar d/o. People often confuse it with MDD and this sounds more like a description of a brief period of remission from MDD or irritability that's a symptom of depression and there's nothing there that illustrates how a manic episode is significantly different from MDD or even a normal range of emotions. I know the clinical terms can get stuck in my head, like I can't move on from "expansive" at the moment, so I'm bringing it up here for suggestions of alternate wording that would be simple, but also more more accurate. Permstrump (talk) 10:00, 31 December 2015 (UTC)Right now we say "During mania an individual feels or acts abnormally happy, energetic, or irritable"The ref says "elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, increased activity that is good directed, reduced need for sleep..."I guess we can changed happy to elevated but not sure what is wrong with "abnormally happy". NIH uses similar language . I agree we should use more complicated terms in the body but IMO we should try to keep the lead easy to understand. User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 06:53, 1 January 2016 (UTC):Doc James I think the original was missing the word "and". In which case, "alternating, or co-occurring elevated and depressed moods" would then cover all three cases of (hypo)manic, depressed, or mixed episodes. -- The Anome (talk) 14:37, 31 January 2016 (UTC)::What does "co-occurring elevated and depressed moods" mean? User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 02:37, 1 February 2016 (UTC):::Presumably they mean a mixed affective state such as dysphoric mania or agitated depression. Please note that I'm not personally defending the wording in question: I'm just trying to elucidate what the original author of those words may have intended them to mean. -- The Anome (talk) 22:57, 1 February 2016 (UTC)::::It means a mixed affective state - dysphoria in mania is not uncommon...and is still considered mania. Agitated depression is depression. Cas Liber (talk '''·''' Special:Contributions/Casliber|contribs) 01:46, 2 February 2016 (UTC)Image of Margaret TrudeauImage:Margaret Trudeau 2015.jpg|thumb|Margaret TrudeauThis was added as the main image and IMO is inappropriate. Also per WP:MEDMOS we do not typically use the term "surfer" User:Doc James|'''Doc James''' (talk · Special:Contributions/Doc James|contribs · Special:EmailUser/Doc James|email) 10:04, 2 February 2016 (UTC)Adding to the History. Melanie Klein on Manic-Depressive StatesThe Manic-Depressive Psychosis had "splitting" as a defense mechanism, or "cleavage" as Melanie Klein referred to it. She noticed this mechanism as a normal part of the human mental growth. But when "reparation", the next defense mechanism in the mental development, was not achieved, the person could suffer from the most severe mental illnesses such as psychopathy, autism and schizophrenia.M.P.L.P.H. (talk) 14:55, 6 January 2016 (UTC)M.P.L.P.H. 14:55, 6 January 2016 (UTC)