Height RankingAt this moment, the constructing ICC has already taller than BOC Tower. I suggest state it is the fourth tallest building in Hong Kong. Kublai (talk) 15:05, 4 September 2008 (UTC)Feng Shui''It is a masterpiece by I.M. Pei'':You might think so.  According to the guidebook I bought, a lot of local Feng Shui experts think it violates natural laws.  I think it's a moderately elegant but basically unremarkable contemporary skyscraper.  If it won awards or anything to back up the opinion, mention it specificially.  --Robert MerkelMerge?This page should either be deleted, or the BOC Tower section in Bank of China (Hong Kong) should be merged into here.  --Riyehn: This page should definitely '''not be deleted''', since this article is (or at least should be) about the building itself, not about the company. The Tower section in Bank of China (Hong Kong) could be narrowed and some info could be moved here.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Siipikarja (talk • Special:Contributions/Siipikarja|contribs) 08:51, 14 September 2007 (UTC);;; ;;:The subject (the building itself) is notable, and there are sufficient sources to attest to this fact. This article is well sourced, and I do not see grounds for deletion. The Bank of China (Hong Kong) is also notable in itself. You don't merge Alan Greenspan into the Federal Reserve. Ohconfucius 00:16, 26 October 2007 (UTC)Refering to edit at 17:43, 30 October 2005Having to mention that one building exists in two ''SimCity'''s is barely worth noting because this is considerably too detailed for readers who are not familiar with the games. Besides, there are comparably more notable landmarks that may merit such mention, such as the Taj Mahal (India), CN Tower (Canada), Saint Basil's Cathedral (Russia) and Hagia Sophia (Turkey), all which are the only landmarks in their respective countries or territories to be featured in both games. ╫ '''25 ring-a-ding;/font;''' 18:02, 30 October 2005 (UTC) ╫:The question is: the little fact appears as trivia in the article. Big deal. -- Jerry Crimson Mann 09:15, 31 October 2005 (UTC)::I appreicate your consideration, frankly. :-D -- Jerry Crimson Mann 13:49, 31 October 2005 (UTC)Mission Impossible III takes place in Shanghai...The reference to Mission Impossible III is wrong. Although the building used in the movie is similar, the story takes place in Shanghai and has nothing to do with Hong Kong.It says ''Contractor: HKC(Holdings) Limited (Kumagai HK)'' in the infobox. Please add a reference for this. --Siipikarja ♫ 13:33, 20 September 2007 (UTC)Night pictureWe need a night picture to show off the building's lighting. Night photos of the building would not only make the page look real nice, but would display the building's structural expressionist triangular frameworks.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by M.nelson (talk • Special:Contributions/M.nelson|contribs) 03:42, 20 June 2008 (UTC);;; ;;Gallery pullsBack in March 2008 user BrokenSphere pulled out a picture gallery from this article. When I asked for the reason, user BrokenSphere gave the following reasonable answer. For the same reasons I reverted the last two edits by Alanmak. From my point of view the main reason for these two last edits was just the promotion of the added picture. Especially as the same picture has also been added to article Jardine House recently. What value does the picture add to the article? After all, the picture is still available via the Commons-link.If you disagree with the reverts, please discuss here before further reverts to avoid Edit war.The ''Chinese'' template is quite nice, we can surely benefit from it. But it's place is not where it was put in the article.;/div;--Siipikarja ♫ 08:54, 23 May 2009 (UTC)Third opinionI agree with Siipikarja on this. The Chinese template doesn't need to have another image in it. Just float the box to the right under the main infobox. As to the rest of the images, I personally don't really like galleries, but some people do. In this case, the one on this page isn't too loud and in the way, but I think we might be approaching overkill with the images. We don't need a lot of images of the same building; one or two will do it. For example, the image of the inside isn't really useful unless there's something particularly notable about it. ;mdash; User:HelloAnnyong|'''HelloAnnyong''' User_talk:HelloAnnyong|(say whaaat?!) 14:28, 24 May 2009 (UTC):Thanks for your opinion User:HelloAnnyong|'''HelloAnnyong'''. One more thing: the caption: ''"The Bank of China Tower (first building from the left) is located in the central business district on Hong Kong Island, next to the HSBC Building, Cheung Kong Center and Jardine House."'' is misleading. The BOC tower is not next to the Jardine House. Also, the Cheung Kong Center is between BOC tower and HSBC building, so strictly speaking BOC tower is not next to the HSBC Building neither. --Siipikarja ♫ 19:23, 26 May 2009 (UTC)