1CryptologyThe article is misleading to the reader in that it confuses cryptography with cryptology (and in fact it suggests that cryptoanalysis is a part of cryptography). I know it's been already discussed zillion times before through the wikipedia history, and different editors have various ideas, possibly there are even some differences in the popular American vs British usage but still it stays confusing. Can we make the distinction clear, based on strong linguistic sources rather than individual editors' opinions ? Similar confusion is common in other languages, still most other wikis have this already properly handled. --Lysytalk 19:00, 24 September 2011 (UTC): Hence the expression "cryptographic attack" would be an oxymoron. But a quick search on Google scholar shows that the expression can be found in over 500 papers. This clearly indicates that even the experts do not always distinguish between the terms cryptography and cryptology. Wikipedia should merely state how a term is used and not try to correct rsp. redefine it. At the moment the article seems to achieve this reasonably well. Special:Contributions/83.79.135.102|83.79.135.102 (talk) 20:25, 24 September 2011 (UTC)David Kahn called it 'cryptology'. -- Narnia.Gate7 (talk) 00:02, 10 May 2014 (UTC)First line and lead section references to "adversaries"I think considering the weight of cryptography's current use with respect to mathematics - the study of codes or encoded messages - is closer to the heart of the meaning of the term. While codes evolved in history as a wartime tool, which lends itself to the idea that adversaries and evading detection are core of the definition, I think "cryptography" as a subject has been reclaimed by academia, culture, and modernity. Modern uses of cryptography include ssh keys, Bitcoin, barcodes and QR codes, etc. '''Andrevan'''User_talk:Andrevan|@ 16:54, 28 November 2013 (UTC)ZXX fontCan fonts as Sang Mun's ZXX be mentioned in the article ?They appearantly can't be read by OCR software (at least not at present).See* * KVDP (talk) 16:53, 16 February 2014 (UTC): I think that would best be mentioned over at Steganography, the Digital subsection, since the idea behind it is not to encrypt but rather to obfuscate the message in such a way that the enemy, in this case a machine, won't recognize that it even exists, yet to leave it in plain sight and easily recognized by the intended recipients, humans. Special:Contributions/66.27.174.138|66.27.174.138 (talk) 03:55, 19 March 2014 (UTC)Possible copyright problemFile:Copyright-problem.svg|left|50x50px|alt=|link= This article has been revised as part of a large-scale clean-up project of multiple article copyright infringement. (See WP:Contributor copyright investigations/Tobby72|the investigation subpage) Earlier text must not be restored, ''unless'' it can be verified to be free of infringement. For legal reasons, Wikipedia cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or printed material; such additions must be deleted. Contributors may use sources as a source of ''information'', but not as a source of ''sentences'' or ''phrases''. Accordingly, the material ''may'' be rewritten, but only if it does not infringe on the copyright of the original ''or'' plagiarize from that source. Please see our guideline on non-free text for how to properly implement limited quotations of copyrighted text. Wikipedia takes copyright violations very seriously. ;;Diannaa (talk) 01:39, 21 March 2014 (UTC) ;;Global surveillanceThis article is about Cryptography. The Global surveillance template (on the right) was added, which I replaced with a link to the Global surveillance article in the See also section. Whizz40 (talk) 13:28, 12 October 2014 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Cryptography. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Attempted to fix sourcing for www.cacr.math.uwaterloo.ca/hac/*Added archiveWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;22:53, 24 January 2016 (UTC)