art1Richard Wollheim's distinctionsRichard Wollheim's distinctions of views on art as either 'realistic', 'objectivistic' or 'relativistic' may be said to be pertaining to, even symptomatic of the predominantly anglo-american school of Analytic philosophy, as opposed to the Continental philosophy; the proposed other major stream in the currents of occidental philosophy. If this is acknowledged it is problematic that the wikipedia article on art, in its current reading, frames art in this fashion. That is predominantly because of the current position in the article of Richard Wollheims distinctions . I will argue that it is at odds with the neutrality policy. In the extension of this argument, one should seek to adapt the habit of adressing the cultural position of information. This can be done in a simple and elegant way without problem; for instant. ''in the context of analytical philosophy, Richard Wollheim suggests three different views on arts practices...''— Preceding unsigned comment added by Xact (talk • Special:Contributions/Xact|contribs) 12:16, 23 September 2009;;;Principles of ArtPrinciples of Art redirects here, yet the principles of art are nowhere contained on this page. Should we copy the information from Principles of Art to this article? Jjnishiyama (talk) 17:23, 2 October 2015 (UTC)Merge "Art" with "The arts"?;;I have been trying to understand the difference between Art and The arts, and based on the 2 articles it is very hard to see a difference.  The arts is listed as one of Wikipedia's top-10 important articles but of moderate quality, and Art seems to actually be the more comprehensive article.  Talk:The_arts suggests merger with Art as a potential path for improvement.I would like to suggest a merge proposal.  Talk page history shows this was considered a few years ago but the discussion doesn't seem very thorough and the conclusion seems based on a misunderstanding about wanting to merge "Visual arts" into "Art".  Would like to see if a new discussion 7 years later might yield different result.My main argument in favor of Merge would be, per guidelines on Wikipedia:Merging, that everyone would agree there is a large degree of '''overlap'''.  There could be discussion around whether or not the 2 topics are in fact a '''duplicate''' of each other.  If someone can clearly explain the difference between The arts and Art, I would encourage that person to add this distinction to the articles in question.I could understand a distinction where one might refer to a process and the other to a result (like the articles on Building vs. Construction), but this does not appear to be the case here. I could also understand one being a subcategory of the other such as Art vs. Visual arts and Fine arts, but if this is the case it is not clearly defined as such in the article.Special:Contributions/92.71.13.2|92.71.13.2 (talk) 16:28, 26 February 2016 (UTC):'''Strong Oppose''' Have you tried a dictionary? "Art" often, as here, means visual art, as in art gallery, and also often all type of things that can be analysed by aesthetics, as in "poetic art".  Meanwhile, "arts" as a collective noun (unless qualified) always means the full range of artistic media, including literature, music, performing arts etc. All that may not be entirely clear from the leads of the current articles, but the subjects are different. "Art" is part of "the arts", but only one part. There is actually not an overlap between the two articles, once the visual arts part of arts is over. It would be clearwer if we could call arts "the arts", but MOS types would never allow that. Johnbod (talk) 21:17, 26 February 2016 (UTC):'''Oppose''' There is bound to be some overlap but the subjects are not the same. The second paragraph of Art explains (perhaps not plainly enough) the distinction: "Music, theatre, film, dance, and other performing arts, as well as literature and other media such as interactive media, are included in a broader definition of art or the arts." The article on the arts is a survey of the activities known as the arts, with links directing the reader to the main articles for each. This article summarizes the many ways that various thinkers have tried to define the nature and purpose of art, and there is no shortage of material there for a long article. Ewulp (talk) 22:04, 26 February 2016 (UTC):'''Oppose''', though there is obviously some overlap between parts of The arts (and Visual arts too for that matter). Art is a specific area of the Arts. I think the current intro to Art explains it with surprising (though welcome) brevity. Sionk (talk) 12:59, 27 February 2016 (UTC):'''Oppose''' An enormous subject like Art which clearly refers to the visual arts needs its own space...Modernist (talk) 13:40, 27 February 2016 (UTC):'''Oppose''', think the difference between "Art" and "an art" is the difference between a class of things vs a specific thing which happens to carry the same name, similar to "God" vs "a god" or "sugar" vs, "a sugar". The statement "making music is an art" doesn't mean the same as "music is art".  Merging is not the right solution. Confusion should be resolved in the article disambiguation header. Special:Contributions/2A02:1810:1C1F:1500:5108:A804:380A:1F4F|2A02:1810:1C1F:1500:5108:A804:380A:1F4F (talk) 18:41, 27 February 2016 (UTC)