External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 3 external links on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Attempted to fix sourcing for *Added archive to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20120605001157/toCheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:10, 13 July 2015 (UTC)NPOV tag: Thoroughly doctored articleI distinctly remember that the text about "200 Years Together" contained a noticeable list of references indicating that the book is full of inaccuracies, biased language, and borrowed misconceptions. Now it is gone, and the section is nothing but praise. Does anybody care to take a look? -M.Altenmann user talk:Altenmann|;'''t''' 00:11, 3 August 2015 (UTC)Also, I fail to see any criticism (well-referenced) that when AS become a celebrity, he acquired the "star disease", and many commenters noted that they would very much like to remember AS only for his Gulag Archipelago,  and forget his later days activities . -M.Altenmann user talk:Altenmann|;'''t''' 00:30, 3 August 2015 (UTC)"===On Russia and the JewsAlthough Solzhenitsyn has often been accused of anti-Semitism, there is sharp division on whether or not the charge is valid. According to proponents, Solzhenitsyn was a Russian ultra-nationalist and anti-Semite in the mold of Fyodor Dostoevsky. Those who reject accusations of anti-Semitism insist that Solzhenitsyn merely held the Jewish people to the same standard of repentance and self limitation as he held other nations.In his 1974 essay "Repentance and Self-Limitation in the Life of Nations",Ericson (2009) pp. 527–55 Solzhenitsyn called for Russian Gentiles and Jews alike to take moral responsibility for the "renegades" from both communities who enthusiastically created a Marxist-Leninist police state after the October Revolution.In a November 13, 1985 review of Solzhenitsyn's novel ''August 1914'' in the ''New York Times'', Jewish-American historian Richard Pipes commented: "Every culture has its own brand of anti-Semitism.  In Solzhenitsyn's case, it's not racial. It has nothing to do with blood. He's certainly not a racist; the question is fundamentally religious and cultural. He bears some resemblance to Dostoyevsky, who was a fervent Christian and patriot and a rabid anti-Semite. Solzhenitsyn is unquestionably in the grip of the Russian extreme right's view of the Revolution, which is that it was the doing of the Jews".Jewish Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel denied this claim and insisted that Solzhenitsyn was not an anti-Semite: "He is too intelligent, too honest, too courageous, too great a writer." He added he wished Solzhenitsyn were more sensitive to Jewish suffering, but believed his insensitivity to be unconscious.In his 1998 book ''Russia in Collapse'', Solzhenitsyn excoriated the Russian extreme right's obsession with anti-Semitic and anti-Masonic conspiracy theories.In 2001, however, Solzhenitsyn published a two-volume work on the history of Russian-Jewish relations (''Two Hundred Years Together'' 2001, 2002). A bestseller in Russia, the book triggered renewed accusations of anti-Semitism.youngThe controversy was fueled by the similarities between ''Two Hundred Years Together'' and an anti-Semitic essay titled "Jews in the USSR and in the Future Russia". According to professor of Jewish history Semyon Reznik, textological analyses of the essay indicate Solzhenitsyn's authorship.Solzhenitsyn responded by saying that the essay was written using manuscripts stolen from him by the KGB forty years before. They were then carefully edited as part of the Soviet State's "active measures" against him.Although ''Two Hundred Years Together'' has never been published in the United States, long excerpts from it appear in ''The Solzhenitsyn Reader''. The book began with a plea for "patient mutual comprehension" on the part of Russian Gentiles and Jews. Solzhenitsyn explained that the book was conceived in the hope of promoting "mutually agreeable and fruitful pathways for the future development of Russian-Jewish relations".In Chapter 9, Solzhenitsyn that, "...it would be quite wrong to say that the Jews 'organized' the revolutions of 1905 and 1917, just as it was not organized by any other nation as such."At the end of chapter 15, Solzhenitsyn expressed a belief that, "every people must answer morally for all of its past -- including that past which is shameful." In this spirit, he urged the Jewish people to answer, "both for the revolutionary cutthroats and the ranks willing to serve them." It is not, he insists, a matter of answering "before other peoples, but to oneself, to one's consciousness, and before God." He explains that Russian Gentiles must also repent "for the pogroms, for those merciless arsonist peasants, for those crazed revolutionary soldiers, for those savage sailors... To answer just as we would answer for members of our own family. For if we release ourselves from any responsibility for the actions of our national kin, the very concept of ''a people'' loses any real meaning.""Moved here for discussion.--Galassi (talk) 15:18, 3 August 2015 (UTC)Problems with the section:*(1) The judgement of AS was not as "black-and-white" as the section starts. The range of the opinions covers a continuous spectrum. - user:Altenmann user talk:Altenmann|;'''t''' 15:36, 3 August 2015 (UTC)*(2) The section gives more space to AS himself than to his critics taken all together. While nothing wrong with that,but the problem is cherry-picking. Only AS niceties towards Jews are cited, while they constitute about 5% of his book about the Jews. - user:Altenmann user talk:Altenmann|;'''t''' 15:36, 3 August 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20121101083310/toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the —User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;08:30, 25 August 2015 (UTC)Sentence in the lede..."Solzhenitsyn was afraid to go to Stockholm to receive his award for fear that he wouldn't be allowed to reenter. " This sentence needs to stand on its own, and it does not. Even if you go on to read the following sentence, which fills out the thought, it doesn't do so very well. It would be more properly worded as "Solzhenitsyn was afraid to leave the Soviet Union and go to Stockholm to receive his award for fear that the Soviet Union would deny him re-entry.", or something along those lines. As it stands now, the sentence makes little sense.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/70.71.95.11|70.71.95.11 (talk) 03:34, 23 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:You are right. Your version is clearer. Go ahead and edit. - üser:Altenmann user talk:Altenmann|;'''t''' 03:42, 23 December 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;07:06, 27 February 2016 (UTC)