HistoryI had added a list of rulers in Brandenburg in Germania from the time after Charlemagne till 1134 Albert I of Brandenburg (Albrecht the Baer).Someone erased the list of more than 100 office holders ,writing something about German apologists.As it now states in the article , it seems that Slavs came , took over and only Slavs lived there till 1134, when Albrecht the Baerbrought in Germans. This has been a popular theory by English speakers for many years.It is false .Does anyone have an explatation, why this widespread theory with English speakers exists ?Why does anyone want to suppress the history of Brandenburg (or Eastern Germania) now in the year 2001, by "omitting" early records?Is that not falsifying ?user:H.J.If you want any sympathy for your dubious "all of this really belongs to Germany" cause, perhaps you can start by not twisting the history of ancient and medieval Europe to show that Celts, Slavs, and Baltic peoples are really Germans -- something you constantly imply.  Moreover, you might just take a look at naming conventions and the format for articles written by most of the Wiki-contibutors.  If you did, you'd notice that throwing in chunks of unrelated facts does not good wiki make.  That's why people remove lot's of your stuff.  If you want to add every member of the house of Brandenburg-Prussia, why don't you do something like  and then add :Brandenburg/Individual|/Individual Ruler Name, where {=[ ??It's not that bloody hard.  JHK[personal attack removed] The so-called Germans who lived there when the Slavs invaded were nothing of the sort -- at least not in the way you mean.  They were most likely a combination of Franks, Saxons, and perhaps a few other tributary people brought in to guard the march.  You can's say the Franks were German.  It's not the same.  If you insist on it, then you also have to accept that they were French, which reduces the "Germans owned Prussia first" argument to the irrelevant.  Oh wait...that's right...the French are really German, so really, it's ok for the Kaiser to just kind of absorb France into the Empire...JHK''Aren't'' the Franks usually considered to be German?  They spoke a Germanic language, hailed from the area, and were called such by contemporaries.  Of course the ancient Germans are not the same people as the modern Germans, but still, it seems somewhat odd to protest the title.Even if the following is true, it doesn't belong in an encyclopedia article on the history of Brandenburg, so I've moved it here:"The country was known as the March of Brandenburg since after 900 AD were a margrave had supreme ruling powers. Other parts of the empire had the same arrangements and the marquis of western France was a margrave as well. A strange phenomena appeared in the last century. There have been numerous books and articles written by historical story tellers with the purpose to gain advantage, by attempting to show that there was an enormous border, a hugh dividing line between the German people and the inhabitants of eastern Europe. Anyone honestly looking at the recorded facts of that time will have to dismiss this as false. This hugh dividing line did not become reality until a thousand years later."Our goal is to write an encyclopedia. Accusing everyone who disagrees with you of not honestly looking at the facts is unhelpful, at best. Vicki RosenzweigSoo... Someone mentioned that cities should be known by name of the time... why It's called Brandenburg in XI century thenm and not BRENNA?!? szopenBerlin-Brandenburg MergingAny info on the Berlin-Brandenburg merging plan ? -- Bact 15:21, 2 August 2005 (UTC), talking breifly about the name of the new state: Brandenburg-Berlin, Berlin-Brandenburgh, or Prussia. -- Bact 15:35, 2 August 2005 (UTC)Difficult to understand the decission of many voters in Brandenburg not to marge with Berlin. That would have created the 6th largest Land in Germany by GDP, a large economy which would have attracted investment, ana d combined population of 6 million. It was an insane decission which costs billions of euros. A conbined Land of Berlin-Brandenburg would save money (one Government instead of two) and atract money (large market of 6 million people) A huge opportunity was lost to create thousands of jobs. I hope the merger will take place anyway in the next future because it makes sense.--Special:Contributions/83.37.194.250|83.37.194.250 (talk) 01:10, 18 October 2011 (UTC)"Slavic: Brennabor"What is 'Slavic', in this context? Either elaborate on why the words "Slavic: Brennabor" should be in this article - and please give sources - or leave it out. This is simply nonsensical to one not actually familiar with the Gdansk/Danzig pissing-up-the-wall-contest, and doesn't belong in an 'encyclopedia'. Space Cadet, what does this have to do with NPOV? Innocent if somewhat dreary articles such as 'Brandenburg' should not be mere pawns in a far broader conflict between Polish chauvanists and German chauvanists. Colonel Mustard 11:47, 11 February 2006 (UTC)"Invasion of Western Slavic Lands by Germany"Tacitus has never been to the so called "Germania", his sources were second hand at best, and the purpose of writing the book was political not ethnographic, so I would not call it "recording". Ptolemy's map leaves too much for speculation, and he never visited the lands either. There was no Germania in the 7th century when the Slavic people arrived. The Germanic tribes lft in 3rd century. Saxon Mark and Nordmark were established in the 10th century. Frankish kingdom of Charlmagne barely reached northern Elbe. Check your info and sources. Space Cadet 23:37, 8 November 2006 (UTC):Provide sources that are better than Tacitus and Ptolemy, then. --MattheadUser_talk:Matthead|discuß!EU|O;/font;18:27, 12 November 2006 (UTC)::Ptolemy and Tacitus are no "sources", so you provide some. And what about my other points?Space Cadet 21:52, 12 November 2006 (UTC)Inaccurate chart removedI removed the earlier version of this chart because it is inaccurate.  It inaccurately suggests that the Free State of Prussia included what had been Royal Prussia after 1918 (which it did not) and, even more egregiously, that the entire medieval region of Prussia was part of Brandenburg after 1945, when in fact it was divided between Poland and the Soviet Union/Russia. Also, if the purpose of the chart is to show the lands that made up the Kingdom of Prussia, there were many more besides the March of Brandenburg and the Duchy of Prussia.  Marco polo 00:35, 23 June 2007 (UTC)I restored the template/chart after editing it.  Marco polo 01:09, 23 June 2007 (UTC)JoblessnessI would suggest that you change "joblessness" to "unemployment" as it fits the register for wikipedia better. I won't change it as I'm not logged in.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/213.38.11.86|213.38.11.86 (talk) 10:06, 21 July 2008 (UTC);;; ;;Placement of administrative map of the state to the rightThe adminstrative map of the state was originally in the middle of the text (under the header for "''Landkreise''" table). I moved it to a place between "''Landkreise''" and "''kreisfreie Städte''". But the best place for it would be to the right of both tables (and the left of the column of 3 images) - and I couldn't get it to fit there. Would somebody with better knowledge of Wiki syntax move it there, please? Special:Contributions/212.58.193.37|212.58.193.37 (talk) 14:03, 10 June 2009 (UTC)Need for Area codeNeed for Area codePlease someone include the area code for Brandenbrug.--Giraldezjota (talk) 10:59, 10 November 2010 (UTC)vandalismSome of the links for this site have been hijacked to go to an anti Semitic 9/11 conspiracy site. Could someone fix this I tried but it's beyond me. Special:Contributions/201.35.125.147|201.35.125.147 (talk) 13:08, 18 February 2012 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Brandenburg. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20120824033640/toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;20:37, 31 December 2015 (UTC)HistoryWe happen to be missing a rather important particular section of history between the German Empire and East Germany. Widgetdog (talk) 16:33, 8 February 2016 (UTC)