rec.sport.cricketDo you suppose its worth a gentle plug on rec.sport.cricket;/tt;.  There are many v. knowledgable people there that could really help this, is specially w.r.t. Asian cricket.Yes, I do, but I'm not a reader of that newsgroup.  If somebody else wants to do that it would be excellent!  Robert Merkelclearer summarythe main entry is already a clearer summary of cricket PLAY than I've ever read (just TRY being an American reading British murder mysteries and reading games instructions to figure it out!) --MichaelTinkler''I daresay that the insect is the first thing people think of when someone says "cricket," especially outside of the UK.  --KQ''(or large amounts of Asia and other scattered outposts of civilisation :)----I wish someone would describe googlie and Yorker in as equally clear a manner!I'm a first time user of this service. I found the page because I wanted to find out the name of the Australian cricket player who invented the googlie, as many years ago I met him. I played cricket in school in Toronto, Canada. I was a deadly spin bowler. The googlie is not a "fast ball" it is a unique spin ball. It is delivered by releasing the ball out of the bottom of the palm of your hand (without using your fingers to try to impart spin to the ball). At the point of release the back of your hand should face the batter, so the release is actually out of the top of your hand because your hand is upside down. Your aiming point is about 2/3 of the way down the pitch and you want two bounces before reaching the batter. For some reason, the ball spins slightly left on the first bounce and slightly right on the second. A half yorker is a ball that arrives above the feet but below the knees of the batter. A full yorker arrives above the knees but below the top of the wickets. That is like a fast ball. If you, or anyone you know can remember the name of the guy I'm trying to remember, plse email me at mrmichaelmouse@shaw.ca. howzthat.:The inventor of the googly was Bernard Bosanquet, an English player who played first class cricket from 1898 to 1919.  Either you're the oldest person to ever use this site, or somebody was pulling your leg.  We should have an article about this guy.  --Robert Merkel 00:13 Oct 11, 2002 (UTC)I got a real chuckle out of your answer; I guess someone was pulling my leg. More likely someone said that this non Bernard entity was well known for his googly. I guess if I can't spell it, I shouldn't wax on it. I appreciate your response. MichaelIt was indeed Bosanquet. I've corrected the spelling of the name in the link. --Dweller 18:59, 27 February 2007 (UTC)True or false??True or false: it is better to use this article for the insect and move other articles to Cricket (disambiguation). 66.32.69.62 23:43, 21 Apr 2004 (UTC)falseFalse - better to move cricket (sport) here and move this article to  cricket (disambiguation).  -- ALoan (Talk) 20:09, 12 Aug 2004 (UTC)False - Agree with ALoan -- Emsworth 21:42, 12 Aug 2004 (UTC)truePatently true, but there's no point in fighting sports fans.  ;mdash; Pekinensis 05:18, 19 Apr 2005 (UTC)True. Crickets have been called crickets before the sport came about.Types of cricketDo we really need the types of cricket mentioned in this dis-ambiguation page?? This is a dis-ambiguation page for the '''meanings of the word cricket''', not the types of cricket. 66.32.246.73 01:32, 21 Sep 2004 (UTC)Proposal: Cricket moved to Cricket (sport) and Cricket (disambiguation) moved to Cricket==On Talk:Cricket, there is a discussion of whether cricket should be moved to cricket (sport) so cricket (disambiguation) can move to cricket. Nereocystis 19:11, 19 August 2005 (UTC)The consensus was not to move the page. PBS 12:01, 9 September 2005 (UTC):I couldn't find a discussion on Talk:Cricket, why's that? --Commander Keane 17:04, September 9, 2005 (UTC)::Talk:Cricket/archive6 -- ALoan (Talk) 17:38, 9 September 2005 (UTC)If we are to be consistent, we must go ahead with the proposal.--Bedford 04:30, 25 September 2006 (UTC)*I think it's no surprise that the proposal was defeated; the poll took place on the talk page for the sport, so naturally it attracted more attention from people interested in the sport. If we are to take a poll to gauge consensus, it must take place on neutral ground. Andrew Levine 19:44, 25 September 2006 (UTC)Requested move;;:''The following discussion is an archived debate of the {proposal}. '''Please do not modify it.''';/font; Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on the talk page. No further edits should be made to this section. ''{The result of the debate was} '''No Move'''.--User:Husond|Hús;/font;User:Husond/Esperanza|ö;/font;nd;/font;;/strong; 03:13, 24 February 2007 (UTC)Cricket (disambiguation) → Cricket — I don't think there's a way to say certainly that the sport is a more likely search term than the insect. It appears that this was proposed back in 2005 and failed, but I think it is worth revisiting. GassyGuy 23:37, 18 February 2007 (UTC)Survey:''Add# '''Support''';/big;;/tt;or# '''Oppose''';/big;;/tt;on a new line in the appropriate section followed by a brief explanation, then sign your opinion using ~~~~.  Please remember that this survey is not a vote, and please provide an explanation for your recommendation.''Survey - in support of the move#'''Support''' I think there is a good chance many people will be looking for the insect when they type "Cricket". TJ Spyke 00:18, 19 February 2007 (UTC)Survey - in opposition to the move#Well, let's start with the fact that we have a WikiProject and a portal dedicated to cricket, with dozens of active editors, hundreds of articles (including a featured portal, 13 featured articles and a t least 22 featured lists)...versus 11 ''articles'' in :Category:Crickets.  While crickets are really cool insects and deserve much more respect than they get, cricket is the second most popular sport in the world.  Guettarda 18:57, 20 February 2007 (UTC)#Per Guettarda. Also, Cricket has clear links at the top of the page to both the insect and the disambiguation page. Flyguy649 19:05, 20 February 2007 (UTC)#'''Oppose''' I'm not going to rehash all of the points mentioned in Talk:Cricket/Archive 6 and elsewhere, but considering the number of links to Cricket (stopped counting at 6000) compared to Cricket (insect) (;100) (admittedly ''some'' may incorrectly point to the sport), the amount of cricket (sport) material on Wikipedia and the enormous global following of the sport, I can only oppose this suggestion. →Ollie (talk • Special:Contributions/Ollie|contribs);19:06, 20 February 2007 (UTC)# '''OPPOSE''' Whats the point of moving the article when it would take the people looking for the inscect the same number of (two) clicks still. I don't think more people will be looking for the inscect over the sport and   the people who are looking for the inscect still have the same easy access  to the inscects article as they would in the disambiguation. You can have a look at the link provided above by Oliver brown and the past Requested move as well the Talk:Cricket/oldpoll|old poll and know why it is the way it is now. This is pretty pointless in my opinion, what good would it do for the reader looking for the inscect anyway? It would still take them two clicks. Pointless...--Thugchildz# '''Oppose'''. ''Far'' more people will be looking for the sport than the insect, in my opinion. Possibly even in the U.S., where in my experience people always seem to be fascinated to know what the game is. Stephen Turner (Talk) 09:13, 21 February 2007 (UTC)# '''Oppose''' As previous discussions have shown, the interest in the sport overwhelms the insect. Gizza;/font;;/b;''Chat;/font;'' Special:Contributions/DaGizza|©;/font;;/b; 06:53, 22 February 2007 (UTC)#'''Oppose''' The arguments have been made many times by people more eloquent than me. If you're interested in the insect, you're demonstrably in the tiny minority. --Dweller 20:18, 22 February 2007 (UTC)#'''Oppose''' the arguments listed above pretty much tell the story. Keep things as is.--User:Evadb|'''Eva''';/font; User talk:Evadb|'''b;/font;''' Special:Contributions/Evadb|'''d;/font;''' 19:17, 23 February 2007 (UTC)Discussion:''Add any additional comments:''* Since this would require moving the cricket article as well, a link to this discussion should be posted there.  Guettarda 18:40, 20 February 2007 (UTC)*I don't contest the popularity of cricket the sport, but I highly doubt wikilinks are the best way to judge this. The fact that more people would be ''fans'' of cricket the sport than cricket the insect is uncontestable. This would account for a lot of the references etc. on Wikipedia. I do not see how you can prove, however, that somebody typing cricket into the search would be more likely to be wanting info on the sport than on the insect. One usage seems just as common as the other, and it therefore seems more sensible to have the disambiguation page in the main slot. How would it be harmful? There are also many similar cases where disambiguation pages take main article slots. Usually there has to be an ''obvious'' (or at least relatively provable) primary usage for that not to be the case. GassyGuy 21:23, 20 February 2007 (UTC)**''I do not see how you can prove, however, that somebody typing cricket into the search would be more likely to be wanting info on the sport than on the insect'' - actually, if people are (far) more interested in the sport than the insect, then it's far more likely that someone looking for "cricket" is looking for the sport, not the orthopteran.  Guettarda 21:33, 20 February 2007 (UTC):''The above discussion is preserved as an archive of the debate.  '''Please do not modify it.''' Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on this talk page. No further edits should be made to this section.;/div;;;DeletionsItems deleted and reason:*Cricket St Thomas, a village in Somerset, England  - reason: MOS:DAB: don't include entries of which the term forms only a part of the name in normal use*The codename for a clicker used in World War II - reason: clicker article doesn't mention it.Rexparry sydney 01:33, 21 August 2007 (UTC):I put the partial match Cricket St Thomas in the see also per WP:MOSDAB but mainly as the park and house are listed there. Widefox; talk 22:23, 21 July 2013 (UTC)