Wikipedia has another long section on the Buddha, with info. that could be included here.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_Buddhism#The_BuddhaBuddhism and JainismThe Article Buddhism and Jainism talks about Buddha finding Middle Way rejecting Jain Philosophy of Hard Penance. Can someone please elaborate on that? -- Pankaj Jain ''Capankajsmilyo (talk '''·''' Special:Contribs/Capankajsmilyo|contribs '''·''' [//tools.wmflabs.org/xtools-ec/?user=Capankajsmilyo;project=en.wikipedia.org count])'' 11:45, 3 September 2015 (UTC)::As stated below in the Extreme Mahayana Bias section, the "Middle Way" taught by the Buddha was upekkha, or equanimity, in which one is not clinging to pain or pleasure associated with sense objects of the body and mind. Penance through self mortification that causes pain or harm to the body (Jain practice) was rejected because it entails clinging to pain and the suppression of tendencies in the body rather than transcending them through understanding the temporal and fleeting nature (anicca) of pleasant and unpleasant feelings associated with sense objects, viewing both the pleasant and unpleasant in an equal light, and not identifying (anatta) with form, feelings, perceptions, ideas (fabrications), and consciousness as 'I', 'mine', or 'part of me'.  A healthy body and mind that is neither clinging to pain nor pleasure actually supports transcendence, and this is why the Buddha finally took some milk rice under the Bodhi tree just prior to his enlightenment - he needed to nourish his body after nearly starving to death, as this supported his transcendence and enabled discovery of the Three Knowledges that were the source of his awakening (See, MN 152).  Both starvation and gluttony take the body out of balance, and clinging to pain or pleasure which is mind-made is what leads to starvation or gluttony. Non-clinging to neither pain nor pleasure keeps one in a balanced state of mind.  This is the Middle Way that was taught by the historical Buddha.::Unfortunately, the Wiki article completely misses the central point concerning the Middle Way, as the authors and editors associated with the Wiki entry want others to believe the Buddha taught continued clinging to sense phenomena is OK as long as it is not "too extreme".  This is not what the Buddha taught, as even 'some' clinging will keep one suffering in samsara, and not in a balanced state of mind.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 21:33, 5 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;Alternate namesIn the Mahaparinirvana section there are several names listed by which the Buddah have been referred. There is some confusion, possible mistakes and a lack of information as well as inline links. Parinirvana refers to nirvana-after-death, as apposed to "nirvana-in-this-lifetime", which would be "the dissolution of the body of one who has already entered nirvana". When one reaches nirvana and finally dies, it is said that he (or she) enters , to be placed in a Parinirvana Stupa or death place.An Arihant in Jainism is a siddha who has not yet died. An Arhat in Buddhism, is a person who has attained nirvana or the "perfected one".*Jina is the same as Arihant (Jainism).*''Jinendra'' is of Jainism origin.*''Sāstr'' is a possible Sanskrit word with unknown meaning.*Sugata is an epithet of the Buddha meaning "gone to bliss".*Tathāgata means "one who has thus gone" or "one who has thus come".*Bhagavā means ["Lord", "Master", "Exalted One", "Blessed One"].*Bhagavata means "the Adorable One".*Bhagavan means "The Blessed One".*''Shakyamuni'' means ["Sage of the Shakyas"].*Mahavira in Jainism means ''omniscient teacher'' of the  dharma.Extreme Mahayana Bias in Description of the Buddha and his TeachingsBiasFirst, use of Sanskrit names for the Buddha (Siddhartha, Shakyamuni, Gautama, etc.) and future Buddha (Maitreya) is clear Mahayana bias, as the Buddha spoke Magadhi, and the Pali language, not Sanskrit, is the closest equivalent.  Sanskrit was the exclusive language of the upper Brahmin caste, whereas the Buddha specifically rejected caste consciousness in his teachings, and mainly taught ordinary village folks in the Magadha region in Northwest India, who obviously were not upper-caste Brahmins and would not have understood the Buddha if he spoke Sanskrit.Second, describing the central teachings of the Buddha as " Middle Way between sensual indulgence and the severe asceticism found in the śramaṇa movement" shows extraordinary ignorance of the Buddha's teachings, bordering on academic malpractice.  In fact, it is serious misrepresentation such as this that is giving Buddhism an "anything goes as long as it is in moderation" bad name that tends toward spiritual relativism. No credible researcher could study the teachings of the Buddha and conclude that sensual indulgence is OK as long as it is not too extreme, as attachment (clinging) to sense objects (including objects of the mind) is presented by the Buddha as the central hindrance to spiritual awakening. Being addicted to only a couple of drinks per day is 'still' addiction, and keeps one chasing the high rather than releasing one from the chase.  The severe asceticism that the Buddha rejected was self mortification (intentionally causing the body pain as a penance) practices like starvation, not continued clinging to sense phenomena.Finally, it is false to suggest the Four Noble Truths, which contain the Eightfold Path, is a 'later' development, as it constitutes the Third Knowledge gained from the Buddha's enlightenment under the Bodhi tree while in the Fourth Jhana of equanimity (non clinging to pleasure or pain).  The Four Noble truths and the Eightfold Path are 'both' an insight and a practice, not one or the other.  I think the confusion comes from not understanding that certain individuals had already done a great deal of practice of the Four Noble Truths (in this life or in previous ones) without knowing that is what they were doing; and in those limited cases, a liberating insight such as anatta, anicca, or dukkha might be all it takes for 'them' to reach spiritual liberation and awakening.And there is nothing 'linear' about the Eightfold Path, and nowhere in the teachings of the Buddha is it suggested that it is linear except for sila being foundational to the rest. The Buddha taught to the current character of those who were presented to him, and sometimes these people needed to focus on their anger with metta, their ego with anatta, or sensual desire with 32-parts of the body meditation.  All of these things appear in the Eightfold Path, but not in any particular order for one's specific practice.  The closest thing the Buddha taught concerning a linear order was removing the 10 fetters, and even there it could be argued that the 10th fetter (ignorance of the Dhamma) and first fetter (release of delusion of permanent self) were inverted or transposed during oral recitation, as the anatta no-self teaching is probably the most advanced teaching, and learning the Dhamma is primary.  Here, the Mahayana bias is most apparent, in that there does not appear to be much general knowledge or grasp of the vast teachings of the Buddha over a 40-year period that appear in the Pali suttas.This whole section on the Buddha should be re-written by Dhamma scholars who have studied everything the Buddha has taught.  Otherwise, this reads more like a rationalization for Mahayana practice and theory that focuses on a handful of 'teachings' (Lotus Sutra, Heart Sutra, etc,) that are difficult to attribute to the historical Buddha given the entirety of what he taught rather than a serious effort to describe who the Buddha was and his teachings.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 04:32, 4 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:If you prefer religious teachings above scholarly research, then Wikipedia is the wrong place for you. Read the provided sources on the four truths, instead of calling this "false."User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 06:19, 4 December 2015 (UTC)::Just read the Indriya-bhavana Sutta of the Majjhima Nikaya (MN 152) that describes the Buddha's enlightenment in his own words, and it is clear that the Four Noble Truths (Third Knowledge) was an integral part and outcome of this enlightenment process, and not a 'later' development as claimed in the Wiki article.  The academic cited in the article in support of the 'developed later' theory obviously has a hidden reductionist agenda (i.e., Buddhism is spiritual relativism), and admitting that the Four Noble Truths was the 'earliest' knowledge gained by the Buddha during his enlightenment process undermines this reductionist agenda.  The idea that being an academic alone makes one unbiased is complete fantasy, and a sophisticated editor edits out these biases so that the article is a neutral description of the Buddha and what he taught. —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 08:52, 4 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:::You've got a funny idea of "neutral" and "biases." Best regards, User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 11:07, 4 December 2015 (UTC)::::Materialism and secularization bias must be acknowledged and rooted out if you are going to present the Buddha and his teachings in a 'neutral' light. Otherwise you are simply trying to 'spin' Buddhism so that it appears compatible with materialism rather than as its antidote as taught by the historical Buddha.  Why else would the Buddha leave behind three palaces full of beautiful women and all of the material and sensual comforts of life as a prince to find spiritual liberation from suffering in samsara? —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 18:00, 5 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:::::Do you not consider Naropa and Tilopa Buddhas?  The dominant form of Buddhism in India was Vajrayana taught at Nalanda, Vikramsila etc.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 21:44, 5 December 2015 (UTC)::::::Tilopa 'may' have been an Arahant, and there is insufficient information concerning Naropa, although the fact that he turned toward Tilopa rather than the Dhamma as his teacher suggests that his understanding was limited to that of his teacher, which may be limited to what that particular teacher needed for their own awakening rather than a comprehensive Dhamma that could be applied to all beings.  The Buddha clearly taught us that after his passing, the Dhamma is to be one's teacher (Maha-Parinibbana Sutta, DN 16, Chap. 2 and 6; also see, Cunda Sutta, SN 47.13, and Gopaka Moggallana Sutta, MN 108).  Nalanda was not even a university in India until the 5th century, 1000 years after the historical Buddha's passing.  The first thousand years were therefore dominated by early Buddhist teachings affirmed by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Buddhist Councils.  There also appears to be a basic lack of understanding concerning the need and purpose of a Buddha by many Mahayana scholars and practitioners.  As long as the Dhamma of the historical Buddha is still available there is no need for another Buddha, as Buddhas simply discover the 'same' Dhamma after the previous Buddha's Dhamma has disappeared.  The historical Buddha predicted that this process of the current Dhamma dying out would take millions of years to occur when humans have average lifespans of 80,000 years (See, Cakkavatti Sutta (Digha Nikaya 26; PTS D iii 58).  The Buddha also predicted that the name of the next Buddha in the next cycle after the Dhamma he discovered has died out would be called, "Metteyya", not Tilopa or Naropa, so we know from the historical Buddha's own words, that neither Tilopa nor Naropa were Buddhas.::::::An Arahant, on the other hand, is someone who takes the Dhamma of the current Buddha and uses this to liberate herself from suffering in samsara.  Therefore any teaching of this Arahant would have to be consistent with the teachings of the historical Buddha, just like the next Buddha.  The only difference between new Arahants during the current cycle and the next Buddha besides their previous kamma earned in previous lifetimes is that they have what the current Buddha taught available to them, whereas the next Buddha is 'forced' to discover what the previous Buddha taught on his own. And even the notion that the next Buddha discovered the Dhamma on his own is a bit of a misnomer because any new Buddha did have exposure to previous Buddhas in past lives, and it is the recollection of these past lives that leads to their discovery of the Dhamma and their awakening.  This is why the First Knowledge of the historical Buddha while sitting under the Bodhi tree during his enlightenment process was "recollection of his past lives".  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 01:41, 6 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;Hinayana leads to Arahantship.  Vajrayana leads to Samyaksambuddhahood.  Tilopa and Naropa are considered Buddhas, just like modern day Khenpo Achö.  Maitreya is the Buddha that appears after Buddhadharma is completely extinguished.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 01:56, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::Again, you are not understanding the purpose and function of a Buddha as taught  by the historical Buddha.  And because the Wiki article concerns the life and teaching of the historical Buddha, those with Mahayana or Vajrayana views like yours should be disqualified from editing the article or their edits should be appropriately headed so that it is clear to the reader that this is a Mahayana or Vajrayana version of who the historical Buddha was and what he taught.  Otherwise you are trying to mislead the reader that the Mahayana or Vajrayana version is the 'only' version worth noting, and this obviously is not a neutral point of view.::And use of derogatory terms like "hinayana" (inferior vehicle) are not only not neutral, they suggest a type of "I am" arrogance, conceit, and pretentiousness that squarely conflicts with numerous teachings of the historical Buddha, and is ipso facto evidence that one has not removed even the first fetter (I am) or the eighth fetter (conceit) that bind beings to suffering in samsara.  Following a teacher who has not removed these fetters makes it nearly impossible for one to remove these fetters themselves and become truly awakened.—Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 02:21, 6 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:::The idea of the Pali Canon being the source of the historical Buddha's teachings is an invention of 19th century theosophists, known as Buddhist modernism.  See ''Origins of Yoga and Tantra'', page 16-17. VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 02:51, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::::Again, more arrogance, more conceit, more full of one's self with "I am" superior to others foolishness. Definitely, not neutral.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 03:00, 6 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:::::No its just academic fact.  See WP:IRONY.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 03:01, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::::::Yes, an "academic" fact being pushed by an academic with a non-neutral point of view. The "actual" fact of the recording of the Pali suttas that were retained on thousands of palm leaf scrolls dating to the First Century has been preserved here in Sri Lanka. You can even visit the cave where the recording occurred. The content of these manuscripts were preserved in Burma, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Laos, and Cambodia, and formed the basis of that which was used in the Fifth Buddhist Council to preserve the Pali suttas on marble slabs.  You can visit Burma today and review these marble slabs for your own edification. No 19th Century Theosophists were present during the Fourth or Fifth Buddhist Councils, and this is an historical fact.  Even the Chinese Agamas, which were written down in the Third and Fourth Century agree for the most part (99%) with the Pali suttas, and this would not be possible if the Pali suttas were created by 19th Century Theosophists as your academic source has argued.Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 03:54, 6 December 2015 (UTC)You misunderstand.  I didn't say Pali Canon is from 19th century.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 03:59, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::The Fourth Buddhist Council in the First Century is where the oral tradition dating back to the First Buddhist Council at the time of the historical Buddha's passing was first written down here in Sri Lanka on palm leaves in Sinhalese characters representing the Pali language. Your academic source would basically have to argue that either this Fourth Buddhist Council never happened, or that the monks from all over the world that attended this event did not memorize correctly what was passed down to them since the time of the historical Buddha. There is simply no evidence to suggest that the event did not happen (the historical record of the event is fairly clear), and the oral recitation appears to be remarkably consistent given that the oral tradition took place over a 400 year period.  There are only a very few instances where there is a lack of internal consistency, and these are easily discerned because the Buddha taught so much and repeated so much of his teachings as pieces that occur in various other discourses in his 40-year ministry that the outliers stand out like a sore thumb.Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 04:27, 6 December 2015 (UTC):::I think you're a dogmatic believer with a lack of critical thinking: "I'm right, you're wrong." Maybe you should learn a little bit more about (letting go of) views; see :Atthakavagga and Parayanavagga. Also read :Pre-sectarian Buddhism, though you probably won't agree with a lot of info there, since it questions your beliefs. Best regards, User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 06:27, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::::No, my friend - the views (what the Buddha calls, "right views") expressed here belong to the Dhamma of the historical Buddha, not I, and each view can be supported by the Buddha's own words. "Beliefs" have no place in the Buddhist lexicon, as all of what is taught in the Dhamma of the historical Buddha can be verified through direct experience and practice.Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 09:23, 6 December 2015 (UTC):::::Speaking of beliefs, this comes from your personal Wiki page: "I don't believe that there exists any "transcendental reality," be it God, Buddha-nature, Brahman or The Truth."  Given this personal bias based on your 'belief', it is virtually certain that your edits to the article concerning the life and teachings of the Buddha will reflect YOUR beliefs, and not a neutral description.Special:Contributions/123.231.124.243|123.231.124.243 (talk) 19:10, 6 December 2015 (UTC)But you have your own beliefs that directly contradict the Visuddhimagga practice manual.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 19:17, 6 December 2015 (UTC):And read WP:GOODFAITH. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 19:21, 6 December 2015 (UTC)::Again, no personal beliefs expressed at all, only words from the historical Buddha. Buddhagosha is a scholar and practitioner who claimed in his own writings that he was NOT an arahant and wished to wait for the Metteyya Buddha to attain spiritual liberation from samsara. Given this fact, Buddhagosha's Visuddhimagga work is at best commentary, and certainly is open to debate and criticism just like any other scholarship from Buddhist commentators.  Some of his writings concerning meditation have been very useful in Buddhist practice, while others have not been particularly useful.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC)Out denting and quoting OP here because I want to re-frame a bit:First, use of Sanskrit names for the Buddha (Siddhartha, Shakyamuni, Gautama, etc.) and future Buddha (Maitreya) is clear Mahayana bias, as the Buddha spoke Magadhi, and the Pali language, not Sanskrit, is the closest equivalent. Sanskrit was the exclusive language of the upper Brahmin caste, whereas the Buddha specifically rejected caste consciousness in his teachings, and mainly taught ordinary village folks in the Magadha region in Northwest India, who obviously were not upper-caste Brahmins and would not have understood the Buddha if he spoke Sanskrit.;/blockquote;* Conventional scholarship employs the Sanskrit terminology as it is both shared with the study of other Indian religious traditions and more familiar and accessible to lay readers. This is for the benefit of the casual reader rather than advancing a claim in favor of any particular sect. Pali terms for key concepts often differ trivially both in their form (dhamma vs dharma) and make more sense when we are talking about concepts specific to the Theravada, rather than shared across the tradition. Anyone who knows the Pali form will recognize the Sanskrit, whereas the reverse is not the case.::Language does matter, and the mere fact that Buddhist scholarship is dominated by Sanskrit rather than Pali scholars does not mean a 'neutral' description of the Buddha should use Sanskrit as a convention, as this tends to subtly push a Sanskritized version of the Buddha (i.e., caste is important) that is invariably rooted in Mahayana and Vajrayana theory and practice. The Buddha specifically rejected caste consciousness, counseled a number of former Brahmin monks to leave their caste behind to become truly awakened, and several lowest caste monks became Arahants, including the Buddha's own barber - Upali - who was charged with safeguarding the entire Vinaya - the rules monks live by, especially when in community with other monks or lay people.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC)* There is no evidence that the Buddha spoke Pali. This is a traditional view that is unsupported by archaeological and linguistic evidence. Scholarship notes and is aware of this traditional belief and similar myths (historically, some Buddhists believed that Pali was the same thing as Magadhi, which was later largely overturned by the actual Magadhi inscriptions). The Pali article does a good job of covering this in detail.::I have not read the Wiki article on Pali, but it is clear that the Buddha would have spoke the language of the region where he preached in the Magadha region or no one would understand him.  And on that point, this would tend to disqualify Sanskrit entirely, as this was an 'exclusive' upper-caste Brahmin language that common village folks along the rivers in the Magadha region would be unfamiliar with - Brahmins were a very small elite minority, not common village folks.  But it is highly likely that Brahmins also spoke the local vernacular of the village folks - how else would they be able to communicate with their servants?Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC)However: With regards to classifying the Four Noble Truths, Eightfold Path, and Dependent Origination as "later" teachings, I think that we could improve here by being a bit less bold in the claims made in the article. Claims with regard to the internal order of material within the Pali Canon/Agamas are notoriously hard to prove and easily diverge into informed speculation. Classifying the teachings into "Core" and "Later Additions" in such a definite way can't avoid taking a side in some very specialized debates, and to me struggles to pass muster on grounds of impartiality and undue weight in this context. The claim that meditation was the only early core teachings and that everything else is a later elaboration, for example, is a claim that reflects a particular scholastic and religious tradition but is not universally accepted either among scholars or Buddhists.::100% in agreement here!Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC)In fact, the whole "Teachings" section seems somewhat out of place to me in this article- this article is about the historical person and there are plenty of articles on Wikipedia that cover what the Buddha might have directly taught and the scholarship surrounding its traditional and scholastic interpretation and analysis. Attempting to identify which teachings were or were not delivered by the historical Buddha is rather beyond the scope of this article, if not Wikipedia itself. I would propose striking that section entirely as an addition by subtraction- a complete exegesis of the debate over the dating of various teachings is too long to be placed inside this article (and is off topic), whereas a summary that just classifies teachings as 'Core' and 'Later' does a great deal of violence to both the traditional and academic consensus, which is far more nuanced and complex. --Spasemunki (talk) 03:21, 7 December 2015 (UTC)::Again, 100% in agreement!Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC):It's a serious topic of research, if not one of the central topics of research in Buddhology; people like Schmithausen, Vetter, Bronkhorst and Gombrich are top-scholars. So, I don't think you can just strike them out.::All of these scholars have an 'agenda' when they write, and if this is not obvious to you, then you need to read their work more critically and attempt to discern a materialist bias.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC):This is about the historical person, not about the later interpretations; the question what he taught is as relevant as can be, as demonstrated by the dogmatic beliefs of this IP. If you think you can leave out the teachings, it's like saying  "We write an article on Brad Pitt, but we leave out the movies, since the article is about the person." Why is the Buddhia noteworthy? Because of his teachings and their influence up to today.::I think discussing a few core teachings from a 'number' of perspectives - not just Mahayana and Vajrayana - would be helpful, along with a link to a more complete discussion on another Wiki page concerning the Teachings of the Buddha.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC):Wikipedia does not exist to confirm religious beliefs; it exists to provide reliable info. Branding a topic "beyond Wikipedia" bypasses the basic reason of existence of Wikipedia. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 05:03, 7 December 2015 (UTC)::The danger here is Wiki becomes associated with pushing a materialist agenda, so all religious experience is discounted, just like the personal bias you expressed in your Wiki profile of not 'believing' there is anything that is 'truth'.  How could you possibly discuss the Buddha's Four Noble 'Truths' with this particular "there is no truth" personal bias in a neutral manner?Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 13:51, 7 December 2015 (UTC):NB: please cite correctly: the article does not say "that meditation was the only early core teachings," nor does it say "Later Additions." It's a little bit WP:TENDENTIOUS to quote incorrectly.:I'm interested to see what sources there are for the academic concencus mentioned in ''"a summary that just classifies teachings as 'Core' and 'Later' does a great deal of violence to both the traditional and academic consensus"'', and ''"a claim that reflects a particular scholastic and religious tradition but is not universally accepted either among scholars or Buddhists,"'' when these scholars mentioned bove are the most prominent scholars on this topic. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 05:20, 7 December 2015 (UTC)IP's responses are scattered throughout above. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 20:20, 7 December 2015 (UTC);::May I remind you that these talkpages are WP:NOTFORUM? Let me also remind you that Wikipedia is based on WP:RS, not on personal beliefs. Schmithausen, Vetter, Bronkhorst and Gombrich are 100% reliable, according to this policy. If you don't accept that, and prefer to advocate WP:THETRUTH, then you're WP:NOTHERE. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 14:46, 7 December 2015 (UTC)::NB: the comment ''"all of what is taught in the Dhamma of the historical Buddha can be verified through direct experience"'' reflects one of the main ingredients of Buddhist modernism, and other forms of spirirtual modernism, namely that :religious experience provides a reliable, empirical basis for religious "truths." Ironically, the Theosophists have been highly instrumental in popularizing this idea in Asia; not only Sri Lanka, but also India and Japan. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 15:04, 7 December 2015 (UTC):::Please , as this makes it falsely 'appear' that I wish to engage in a forum discussion of the article rather than improve the neutrality of the article.  It is very important for the reader to understand who and which comment I am responding to so it is clear that this is within the context of improving the neutrality of the article.  It is understood that you don't like your lack of neutrality pointed out using your own words from your personal Wiki page concerning your 'belief' that there is no 'truth'. But others should make the call, not you, whether this belief disqualifies you from editing a Wiki page about the life and teachings of the Buddha that discusses the Four Noble 'Truths' as the earliest and most central of the Buddha's teachings.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 15:25, 7 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;::::The context was provided; you're messing-up the chronology of this talkpage, AND you removed my comments  . This is a warning: don't be WP:DISRUPTIVE, and WP:ASSUMEGOODFAITH. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 16:26, 7 December 2015 (UTC)I've  the IP's responses at their scattered positions. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 20:20, 7 December 2015 (UTC)ProposalI believe my comments may have been misunderstood. I am not disputing that the sources in the Teachings section are reliable; I am saying that I think the issue under consideration (which teachings are early) is better covered in more complete detail elsewhere. Early Buddhism seems like a more appropriate destination for the material in the Teachings section. The historicity of the early teachings is a very broad concept and an area of a lot of research. I think organizationally placing the material from the Teachings section in the Early Buddhism article puts it in its proper context, and is more likely to get the appropriate attention there. I think the Brad Pitt analogy is flawed; I would compare instead the Jesus article which tackles biography and historicity (both big topics) without attempting to classify specific teachings as original or not. To whit: We present three views regarding the early teachings, and then we present several paragraphs drawn only from the third view. We do not mention the Buddhavacana tradition, which likely constitutes the most widely held popular view and is roughly congruent with the first of the three academic positions mentioned. There has been good work done in collecting these sources and positions, but the reader might be better served by being directed to a more central and complete discussion of the issue rather than re-creating a portion of a very large topic (the historicity of certain teachings) in what is already a very large topic (the historicity and traditional biography of Gautama). I'll create a more concrete suggestion to try and bring us back to an actual edit --Spasemunki (talk) 20:52, 7 December 2015 (UTC): I've suggested a revision at User:Spasemunki/techings section (because I am a slapdash speller)- I would propose that the remainder of the Teachings section be merged with Early Buddhism. --Spasemunki (talk) 21:05, 7 December 2015 (UTC)::I am in 100% agreement with Spasemunki's proposed solution.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 15:04, 8 December 2015 (UTC)::'''Oppose'''VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 22:11, 7 December 2015 (UTC):::Would you mind discussing your objections? --Spasemunki (talk) 23:15, 7 December 2015 (UTC)::::Spasemunki I'd already been thinking about your comments yesterday, and you've certainly got a point here. Your proposal keeps essential information. Yet, it also omits essential information: the Buddha's teachings may have been different from what we today perceive as his teachings. I think that that's essential information. An encyclopedia does not exist to conform our worldview; it exists to provide new info and make us think about our knowledge.::::The article on :Pre-sectarian Buddhism provides a fulle roverview, and also an alternative theory, on the research on the earliest teachings. Actually, the info in the Buddha-article was copied from that article.::::There's also another point to consider: the relation between dhyana and insight is a decennia-old "problem" in the study of Buddhism, and reveals clearly that there have been developments within Buddhism, even at a very early stage. It's a problem that's also relevant for other religious traditions, that is, Hinduism and modern spirituality. And it's a problem that's still actual, as can be seen in Zen-Buddhism (Rinzai versus Soto), and in the controversy over :Neo-Advaita. This is the essential question: is "insight" sufficient to be "liberated"? This question is related to other questions: what does "liberated" mean, how does it effect someone? This is not only an academical question, it's also a practical question, which will be recognisable for mny practitioners.::::The scholars mentioned here, Vetter etc., are not just random scholars; they are top of the bill, the leading scholars on this topic. One of the core policies, nay, the mission of Wikipedia, is to provide an overview of the relevant information on a topic, based on WP:RS. This is as relevant as can be: what did the Buddha himself teach, according to the leading scholars on this topic?::::Most people, even Buddhist, will never read this kind of studies. I read them only after 25 years of practice and study, and I'm not the average person in regard to reading academic studies. Bookstores, also New Age book stores, typically don't sell academic studies on Buddhism. They only sell popular books, which confirm the popular views. So, yes, in accordance with the mission of Wikipedia, this article on the Buddha is a very appropriate place to serve this portion of fresh mind food.::::Best regards, and thanks for your thoughtfull input, User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 05:10, 8 December 2015 (UTC):::::All of this should be in the Teachings section on Buddhism, as these are not introductory concepts and perspectives.  I personally agree with you on the "insight vs. dhyana" issue that generally speaking insight is not enough for awakening for most people, but I think where we differ is concerning the acceptance of past life reality, in which one could have done considerable work in past lives, in which one liberating insight might be all it takes for 'that' person.  The historical Buddha is a classic example of this type of spiritual liberation.  Of course, if you do not accept past life reality as you have stated elsewhere, you would then discount the historical Buddha's description of his enlightenment experience.  But not accepting past life reality puts you at odds with perhaps 95% of the Buddhists worldwide, including the historical Buddha and the Dalai Lama of Tibetan Buddhism.  Because your personal views are so far out of the mainstream of Buddhism, it is difficult for you to edit sections on Buddhism from a 'neutral' point of view.Special:Contributions/123.231.127.74|123.231.127.74 (talk) 15:04, 8 December 2015 (UTC)::::::I accept past lives just fine.VictoriaGraysonUser talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 15:06, 8 December 2015 (UTC)Birth Place of The BuddhaThe birth place of The Buddha is undoubtedly Lumbini, now a city in Kapilvastu District of present-day Nepal.I tried to change it in the first paragraph but it was instantly reverted by Chewing72, perhaps the contributor of the page.My logic is that it should not be objectionable, for any reason, to anyone to mention the birthplace of The Buddha,stating where it lies now.Chewing72 had the logic that at the time of The Buddha, there were no Nepal and India. I agree to it.But, why is it objectionable for him/her to state that Lumbini now lies in Nepal? It should be corrected with immediate effect.Thank you! —Preceding unsigned comment added by Singa lama (talk • Special:Contributions/Singa lama|contribs) 06:36, 4 January 2016‎ ;;;:Nepal is being mentioned in the "Conception and birth" section. Mentioning "Nepal" in the lead-section is undue; the Buddha is known and relevant for his teachings, not for his place of birth. That's only relevant for present-day Nepalese nationalists, not for the person of the Buddha. Please read the note in the infobox. This has been discussed thoroughly before; there is a broad concencus not to mention Nepal, given the nationalistic sentiments at the Indian subcontinent. User:Joshua Jonathan|Joshua Jonathan;/font; -User talk:Joshua Jonathan|Let's talk!;/font; 05:55, 4 January 2016 (UTC)::I agree with Joshua Jonathan, per WP:LEAD the lead should summarize the article; mentioning "Nepal" in the lead-section appears to be undue. The "Conception and birth" section states: "The Buddhist tradition regards Lumbini, in present-day Nepal to be the birthplace of the Buddha."  JimRenge (talk) 14:06, 25 February 2016 (UTC)Supreme Buddha:''"In most Buddhist traditions, Siddhartha Gautama is regarded as the Supreme Buddha (Pali sammāsambuddha, Sanskrit samyaksaṃbuddha) of the present age"''The above statement is not true.  In Mahayana Gautama Buddha is the Supreme Nirmanakaya.User:VictoriaGrayson|VictoriaGrayson;/font;;/b;User talk:VictoriaGrayson|Talk;/b; 00:22, 10 January 2016 (UTC)Facing the Buddhashould I face our buddha in any certain direction?  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/81.141.134.31|81.141.134.31 (talk) 12:34, 15 February 2016 (UTC);;; ;;should I face our buddha in any certain direction?  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Hicklebrae (talk • Special:Contributions/Hicklebrae|contribs) 12:40, 15 February 2016 (UTC);;; ;;