----Untitled"To be" is also used to express the passive voice in English, thus::"This book is often criticized by academics." is the passive form of the sentence: "Academics often criticize this book."Having been a contributor to this page, I think all this is very poorly analyzed and should be redone. Even my dictionary (American Heritage) does not call the meaning of "to be" as existence, a "copula." My linguistic training agrees with this notion, as well. RoseParks----Yeah, that kind of bugs me too.  In a simple existence statement, "be" is the predicate itself, not a copula.  One problem is that the concept of "copula" itself is not entirely solid.  There's some good information here that should be retained, but it is somewhat unclear.  I'll do a page on "copula" that we can link to make it easier to rewrite this one.  --LDC----Who wrote that there's no verb "be" in Russian?  That's silly.  Yah shouldn't write stuff about what you don't know...first, say no falsehoods.  (The philosopher's adaptation of "First, do no harm.") --LMS: In the Russian language, the verb ''byt' '' is the infinitive of "to be."  The third person singular, ''yest' '' means "is" (and, interestingly enough, it is also the infinitive "to eat") but there is no present- but a future-tense (''budet'') and a subjunctive (''byl/a by'') copula in the Russian language.  ''Yest''' (in the non-gustatory sense) is restricted in use to express existence; ''On yest' '' means "He exists," while ''On yest' krasivyi'' is nonsense (though it is how an English speaker might try to translate "He is handsome").  There ''is'' a past-tense copula in the Russian language.  E.g., one can say, ''Ona byla krasiva'': "She was beautiful.":: Is == eats? Compare German ''Man ist was man isst.'' You are what you eat. Compare Frank Zappa's song "You Are What You Is".::: "Is" == "to eat". These words are often similar in IE languages (originating in PIE stems es-, and ed-, respectively - and their similarity is also interesting).First of all, the verb ''byt' '' in Russian does have a past tense, ''byl'' (but no perfect form, by the way). Secondly, I see little interest in the fact that ''yest' '' means both "to eat" and "is" (although some interest is in their similarity - both going back to PIE, also 1st person present used to be ''yesm''', much like the Latin ''sum''). In addition, one can always say ''On yavlayetsya krasivym'', "He is beautiful", so it's incorrect to say Russian can't use an auxiliary verb in the present tense. Finally, perhaps it all should be moved to To be (verb)? --Uriyan