}}List of colors hatnoteOut of the 6 newest Special:ArticleFeedbackv5/Color|feedbacks on color 5 were looking for lists of colors and didn't find it. I therefor added a link to list of colors in the about hatnote on the top of the article. Ulflund (talk) 06:00, 14 October 2012 (UTC)Problem with "...people everywhere have been shown to perceive colors in the same way[2]"The reference cited in that statement and the associated references to "Linguistic Relativity" only show that a large collection of people (a "culture") COLLECTIVELY seems to perceive colors in the same way. But in no way does it show that there aren't differences between how two individuals perceive colors. In fact, we know that individuals do in fact have differences in color perception, as shown by the various types of mild-to-profound color blindness that occurs. As a more extreme example, how do we know that my internal perception of, say, purple isn't the same as your internal perception of brown? Does it even mean anything to ask that question?As someone with moderate red-green color blindness, I can assure you that my perception of red is very similar to my perception of green. Therefore, if you do not have red-green color blindness, then it follows that at least one of my red or green perceptions does not match yours.I'm not an expert in the field of color, but I am an expert in two fields, plasma physics and economics, both of which have situations where collective behaviors exist that contrast fundamentally in nature with individual phenomena.Are there any studies that address these questions? If so, I think it would be useful if someone familiar with them could discuss and reference them in this article.Tdshepard (talk) 23:25, 4 January 2013 (UTC):Another example of a different perception of colour within a culture is the variation in identification of certain shades of blue and purple. I have noticed that a car standing alone will have some people arguing it is blue while others argue it is purple, when seen with other cars that are obviously blue it becomes either a purplish-blue or a bluish-purple depending on bias. Are we seeing colour differently or were we taught to see them that way? There was a study conducted around two years ago and made into a TV documentary that found that people do not perceive colours in the same way. The study concluded that identification of colours is learned.  Wayne (talk) 03:43, 4 March 2013 (UTC)::I've read an article a while back that explains how individuals with normal color vision do perceive colors the same way. It even went on explaining how it is not possible for individuals with normal color vision to ''not'' perceive colors the same way. I'm gonna try to find the article now but no promise.--'''''User:Krystaleen|Krystaleen;/font;''''' 03:51, 4 March 2013 (UTC):::I just tracked down the notes I wrote down about the study.  Experiments indicated that the colour an individual sees for a particular wavelength is not exactly the same colour as that seen by another individual for the same wavelength. It basically found that colour is perceived by the brain based on individual experience and on how usefull it is to that individual knowing of the existance of various colours. Wayne (talk) 03:57, 4 March 2013 (UTC)Color Page MovePer the boxes at the top of this page, debate about how to spell this article, and Wikipedia's wider policy and readership, is unnecessary here.I do roughly understand the reason for having the word being spelt '''COLOR''' on this page as Wikipedia is primarily active in United States of America. However in UK and a majority of the English speaking commonwealth, the English* spelling of Colour. I do not want to fully move it to the English spelling of '''COLOUR''', as people will rage. Instead why don't we finally create harmony by moving the page to '''Colour/Color''', which recognises both the English and American English spellings. Thank You. Let there be peace on both sides of the Atlantic.*I have called it ENGLISH opposed to BRITISH ENGLISH, as in some cases Welsh and Scottish variants can differ.Warner REBORN (talk) 17:30, 17 July 2014 (UTC)That explaination really doesn't wash. In any case, this article is properly titled, just as it should be. Local spelling visitations should be noted, but have no place in the article title. John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 22:54, 1 August 2014 (UTC)Why is COLOR even allowed? It is all wrong. Just because a bunch of rebels decided to misspell a language it should now be the standard? Jorgenpfhartogs (talk) 19:16, 2 August 2014 (UTC):I use Australian English, which is much more like UK English than American English. I can accept that those foreigners in America use spelling that my English teachers would have failed me for using. I can accept that in many Wikipedia articles it hardly matters which form of spelling is used. But for Colour/Color it's almost unbearable. Seeing the word spelt in the American way grates appallingly on my sensibilities. I wish we did have a way of highlighting, at article title level, that half the English speaking world think "color" is just plain wrong. Not an alternative spelling. A wrong spelling. HiLo48 (talk) 01:52, 3 August 2014 (UTC)To the majority of English speaking people "colour" is wrong. I don't always agree with spell checkers, but the spell checker is actually right in this case! John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 02:37, 3 August 2014 (UTC):My spellchecker says differently. (Did you not know that one could set them to different language variants?) Can you please define "majority of English speaking people"? (Did you count those among India's 1.2 billion people?) And you actually missed my point. It's the degree of seeming wrongness I was trying to describe. I can cope with seeing "organize", where my teachers taught me "organise", but "color" really irks. HiLo48 (talk) 02:56, 3 August 2014 (UTC)"Colour" irks me and the British lost the right to tell us how to spell 238 years ago, they should be grateful to us that they aren't spelling it "farbe"! John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 03:17, 3 August 2014 (UTC):I'm not British and I'm not telling you how to spell. I AM telling you how I spell, and that it's not wrong. Nor is your way of spelling. HiLo48 (talk) 03:29, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::You may not be trying to tell me how to spell but the Irishman above is, and the Irish in particular should be grateful they aren't spelling it farbe. :)   John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 04:06, 3 August 2014 (UTC)* Please see WP:ENGVAR. While I wish that en.wikipedia had support for dialect options, it doesn't. As long as there isn't a common word and spelling across variants of the language a choice unfortunately needs to be made on which to use, otherwise endless discussions going back and forth are likely. ENGVAR provides the guidelines for cases like this one. PaleAqua (talk) 03:23, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::I would like to change those guidelines, for a very small number of cases; perhaps only one. You might argue that the discussion needs to occur at the page for those guidelines, but I think there is a case for beginning the conversation here at that one case, simply to see if there is any support for my view. I'm really only seeking polite discussion. HiLo48 (talk) 03:29, 3 August 2014 (UTC)I just noticed that, according to this talk page's header, we shouldn't even be having this discussion. I don't think this is going to be very productive. It reminds me of people who insist that data is plural just because the Latin form is plural, not considering how the word is actually used in English, so they say such things as "the data are" which makes me ask "how many data are there?" John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 04:31, 3 August 2014 (UTC):For a very small number of words, perhaps only this one at this stage, I really would like to change the guideline you've just noticed. As I have said above, I can cope with most American spellings, such as "defense", and "aluminum", but "color" just seems so wrong to my brainwashed and aged mind (we are hopefully all brainwashed into "correct" spelling by our teachers, and age is unavoidable for all of us eventually) it actually gets in the way of reading the article. So, I'm not arguing that the spelling of "color" is wrong. It works for you. It doesn't work for me, in a very serious way. I'm just seeing if anyone else feels the same way as I do, and whether there's anything we could do about it. No policy is cast in concrete forever.  HiLo48 (talk) 04:40, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::'''Enforce American or British spelling''' is one of the Perennial proposals. This talk page is not the place to have the debate, because there are many words that would be affected. Not everybody is going to be pleased regardless of which spelling is used.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 05:59, 3 August 2014 (UTC):::Is that directed at me? I'm certainly not asking that we enforce American or British spelling. At this point, only one word would be affected by my idea. HiLo48 (talk) 06:03, 3 August 2014 (UTC):No, I was simply pointing out the policy. I've hatted this thread because the consensus of past discussions is that it is off topic for this page.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 06:26, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::I've unhatted it, because you don't seem to have acknowledged what I have been saying. You seem to have seen this as a simple case of arguing about which spelling is correct. That's not what I am trying to discuss at all. Please read my posts above and respond to them. HiLo48 (talk) 07:14, 3 August 2014 (UTC):::It is all in the talk page header. I am British and the article Color was  with the American spelling in November 2001. Like it or loathe it, there is no need to debate whether it should be changed.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 07:23, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::::Thank you for proving me right. I am NOT debating whether it should be changed. HiLo48 (talk) 07:36, 3 August 2014 (UTC)Since the vast majority of  the Egnlish Wikipedia users and editors read and write in American English, all articles should be written in American English unless the subject matter is such that it provides a compelling reason for the article to be written in British or some other regional/local variation. John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 20:46, 3 August 2014 (UTC)::Can you please define "vast majority of  the Egnlish Wikipedia users and editors"? Did you count those among India's 1.2 billion people? HiLo48 (talk) 03:52, 5 August 2014 (UTC):::You honestly believe there are 1.2 billion people in India who edit Wikipedia in English?  John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 04:10, 5 August 2014 (UTC)::::No. That would be part of the reason I didn't say that. HiLo48 (talk) 04:56, 5 August 2014 (UTC):::::Please read the talk page header. Color/colour is a form of electromagnetic radiation. This is off topic and will be hatted if it continues.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 05:41, 5 August 2014 (UTC)::::::Have you actually read what I have been saying? I am not arguing that one spelling is more correct than another. Nor that one should be favoured at the expense of the other. In fact, my point is quite the opposite to that. It's extremely frustrating to see so many criticisms of what I have been saying that seem to be based on a lack of thorough reading of what I have been saying. HiLo48 (talk) 07:05, 5 August 2014 (UTC):::::::Yes I have. The consensus of past discussions is that there is no point in revisiting this debate, because the article has been Color since its creation in November 2001.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 07:40, 5 August 2014 (UTC)::::::::Well, you didn't mention my main point there, so if you did read all my posts, you have not understood them. HiLo48 (talk) 07:59, 5 August 2014 (UTC):::::::::I'm out of this thread. Spelling is a non-issue here.--'''''User:ianmacm|♦IanMacM♦ (talk to me)''''' 08:13, 5 August 2014 (UTC)This is an exact quote of what I last responded to:''Can you please define "vast majority of the Egnlish Wikipedia users and editors"? Did you count those among India's 1.2 billion people?''That implies that the group "users and editors of English Wikipedia" includes 1.2 billion people in India. First you said it, then you turned around and claimed you didn't.The user that started this thread in the first place admitted:''Wikipedia is primarily active in United States of America''That implies the exact point I last made above, that to most English Wikipedia users color is correct and colour is wrong. As for the other issue, mentioned much earlier in this discussion, if you seriously believe that there are 1.2 billion English speakers in India, you need to do some fact checking! The English used in India is about as relevant as the English used in Mexico. I didn't respond to that initially because it is clearly a non sequitur, there are not 1.2 billion English speakers in India and that has nothing to do with the makeup of English Wikipedia users and editors anyway.  John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 11:54, 5 August 2014 (UTC):Please think about the meaning of "those '''among''' India's 1.2 billion people". It doesn't mean all of them. And, Wikipedia is active all over the world. I'd be interested though to see more precise readership figures. Another editor in this thread isn't a reliable source. HiLo48 (talk) 11:57, 5 August 2014 (UTC)PurpleWhy do the charts refer to violet also as "purple"?  Violet is not purple and purple does not correspond to any part of the spectrum! These articles are supposed to present facts, not common misconceptions. John Alan Elson;/b;;/font;★ WF6I A.P.O.I.;/b;;/font; 22:31, 1 August 2014 (UTC):This seems to have been corrected already. I also corrected another misuse of the word purple and think this is now correctly used throughout the article. Ulflund (talk) 00:16, 27 August 2014 (UTC)A multitude of problems with this article.I'm not sure where to begin. This article is HORRIBLY written! Color is NOT "the visual perceptual property corresponding in humans to the categories called red, blue, yellow, etc." It is a visual perception AND a (visual) property. Confusing the two is just wrong, as is confounding the two. Color, as an abstract property (ie unrelated to the things which have it, without context), is not something that non-humans have/use (afaik), so to use "humans" to imply that color is broader than a human experience is misleading. The ENGLISH LANGUAGE categories "called red, blue, yellow, etc." have no more significance than OTHER categorizations used by OTHER cultures, and are NOT in any way fundamental to the definition of color. It is FALSE that "Color derives from the spectrum of light (distribution of light power versus wavelength) interacting in the eye with the spectral sensitivities of the light receptors." ..."with the spectral sensitivities" ????? "interacting with the eye"??? The eye doesn't act ON the emr, the emr acts (one-way) ON the eye, there's no "inter-". Color "derives" from both our eyes' response(s) to light and how the resulting electro-chemical signals are interpreted and processed by our brains. There seems to be zero appreciation of the basic fact that color is a mental construct which we assign as a (static/stable) property of objects. The color of an object depends on how our brains interpret the signals our eyes receive, the physical transformation from emr to electrochemical signals is only a part of the story; in terms of the energy used by our optical system, it is a minor part. Ignoring the major role that our brains play in this process is just wrong. I could write a couple of more pages listing all that is wrong with this, its just so bad.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/216.96.79.240|216.96.79.240 (talk) 22:18, 21 October 2015 (UTC);;; ;;