accentImho, it's correct to say he has an "Austrian" accent.  Kind of similar to saying someone has a "British" vs. an "American" or even a "Southern" accent.  It's not strictly by name of language, it's by nationality or region.  Well, the comparison isn't quite right, since he is speaking a foreign language, but hey. --Arnoldlover 02:11, 23 August 2005 (UTC)**What language does he speak exactly? He obviously speaks Austrian German, but what dialect exactly ? Some form of Austro-Bavarian, particularly Central Austro-Bavarian ?I read that he had a Bavarian accent. - Matthew238 04:54, 19 November 2005 (UTC)* His German is Styrian (with considerable American influence) IMHO. He has the characteristic diphtongs. Styrian is part of Southern Austro-Bavarian.  Martg76 22:36, 20 December 2005 (UTC)AB 1493An act to amend Section 7052 of the Health and Safety Code,relating to human remainsI believe firmly that this has no place in the article and have therefore decided to remove it."On September 10, 2004, Schwarzenegger signed a bill into law that made the sexual abuse of a corpse a felony punishable by up to eight years in prison. This was in response to recent incidents of people found engaging in sexual acts with deceased persons, and that law enforcement was unable to charge them for that abuse because no law had been on California's books at the time. Prior to the bill being signed by Schwarzenegger, the most prosecutors could charge them with was breaking and entering. The signing of this law did however make Schwarzenegger the butt of several jokes by late night talk show hosts such as Jay Leno."The article implies that Schwarzenegger must have contributed to the bill in some other way besides that of signing it. The bill was actually proposed as an amendment to a previous bill by California Assemblywoman Sharon Runner of the 36th district.. I find no reason to include it and further consider it to be slander and partially biased. Therefore, I have erased it from the article as it has no merit or purpose.---So why don't you just put that info, even if it's not to your standards, or relevant beliefs??? Remember; Information is King.honorary doctorSchwarzenegger was awarded a "Doctor of Humanities" from Cleveland Chiropractic College in 1999. The honorary diploma was presented by Dr. Carl S. Cleveland III, president of Cleveland Chiropractic College, Kansas City and Los Angeles. The diploma recognizes Arnold's many humanitarian efforts and his support of fitness and health-related endeavors, such as the Inner City Kids program and the Special Olympics. -- Dr. Gohan"I am very honored to get this honorary chiropractic degree, this is totally unexpected," Arnold commented. "I'm proud of this. It will get a special place in my office and I will be hanging it up so everyone can see." -- Arnold SchwarzeneggerPolicemanSaying his father was a "Gendarmerie-Kommandant" it's not really correctly translated to call him a "policeman", but rather the boss of a police-station. I know, that's quite a minor point, but nevertheless my first contribution.*Not all of us know what "Gendarmerie-Kommandant" means.  Would you mind adding what that would mean in this article? Thanks. Revth 06:57, 6 Jun 2004 (UTC)**He was a "police chief" is the best translation. I'll add that to the article. - Matthew238 01:24, 5 January 2006 (UTC)-----True Lies Spoof?True Lies was a spoof of the roles he had played before. I seem to remember that the critics actually liked it when it came out?  --sodium:I recall a review describing it as misogynist rubbish::Are you thinking of Last Action Hero - as the spoof on roles played before.''True Lies'' a good flickAlthough many people have accused ''True Lies'' of being somewhat misogynistic, there are many people, myself included, who think it's one of his best films.  The film is clearly intended NOT to be taken seriously.--John Knouse:And it's a remake of a French movie.Hektor 14:54, 2 October 2005 (UTC)It's very racist as well. But then, Schwarzenegger never made a good movie.NPOVThe article had a number of epithets which really cannot be squared with the NeutralPointOfView.  It is wholly within our purview, however, to have a section about reviewers' evaluation of his acting ability; it is also perfectly fair play to mention how various films were reviewed.:If you're referring to where the article refers to his "wooden acting style," I don't think that's a POV issue.  Not that I'm trying to set up a slippery-slope arguement, but that is a fairly inoccuous piece of description... we shouldn't have to rely on third parties for every descriptive term we use.  Would we call it a POV issue if somebody referred to the redwood as "these majestic trees?"  A POV issue for Arnold would be if somebody characterized him as a dangerous radical, or a crusading right-winger, or something like that... loaded terms.  It's a fine line, but let's err on the side of interesting prose rather than strict political correctness. Iroll 21:31, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC)::Perhaps ''unsigned'' is referring to my changes "Nectarflowed (→Summer 2005 - De-POV summer 2005 section. Arnoldlover, this is an encylopedia, not a political soapbox.)".  It seems the accusation is based on confusion between the two contracts, one announced and one quiet, between Arnold and American Media. User:Arnoldlover----RumorsI didn't know what to do with the following: "A number of unsavoury rumours appear to have have kiboshed his nascent political ambitions which once seemed to reach as high as you could go."  What nascent political ambitions?  What rumors? --LMS:''What nascent political ambitions?'' He was considering a run for Governor of California.:''What rumors?'' That he was a womanizer and had emotionally abused his wife:Here's the story: www.freerepublic.com/forum/a3a9c08d556f1.htm:The rumors were scurrilous and politically motivated and have no place in an encyclopedia except possibly under the heading propaganda. --MemoryHole.comI can't believe that anyone quotes the New republic and anything that it prints. The only people who don't likee Arnold are those who would love to see socialism here in the USA. The difference is that in Europe, the socialists have found ways to eliminate grass roots movements, such as abolishing referendums. Socialists are fascists in sheeps clothes. Go to europe and try voicing your opinion. They have it so great. Yeah right...--Tomtom 21:26, 1 Aug 2004 (UTC): I live in Europe and i can attest to this. It is true. Socialists now have full control. Anyone who disagrees is immidiately pushed aside of politics and ideas with all kinds of epiteths, this when any non-socialist candidate isn't right down shot in the head, harassed by the EU till resigning, or like Teo Van Gogh outright stabbed to death and decapitated by immigrants. Discussion is not possible, the secret polices of many European countries now set up honeytraps for non-socialists and monitor them. The EU parlament has been trying to pass so "anti-Hate" laws which are nothing but censorship. In Belgium the most voted party was already banned, i live was born and live here and to be fully honest democracy is merely a mirage. To make it all worse the government funded TV's are seriously socialist and unionnised, they fully control public discussion. 85.138.0.158 23:46, 6 July 2006 (UTC):Do you have a point or are you just spreading FUD? Please be specific in your accusations if you want to be taken seriously.  I do agree with memoryhole that rumors don't belong here (unless they have a non-rumor effect, I guess). User:ArnoldloverI partially argee with Tomtom on the socialist issue. The trouble is that much of our problems in politics of the free western world are due to the fact that complete Fundamental Socialism and complete Fundamental Capitalism both support the same dangers of totalitarianism. The only difference is who would enforce it, Corporations or Government. The utopia we should strive for is a compromise which above all fights all blatent lies and conspiracy from influencing the public or defining justice.This fight against Arnold should be recorded with complete quotes from both arguments and references to more sources that explain the ones which are true or false, and why they are such. Please, place it under "propaganda and controvercial arguments" but above all, please do not withold it from the system. I came looking for information here of what people were talking about when they said arnold stole 2 million from education. I'm sure that it's all lies but the problem is that here at Saddleback College in California, the college students who run the political clubs are quite convinced, even when they too do not know anything more about it then the accusation itself. I'm forced to dig into these fools much too personally for being too lazy and irresponcible to read the propositions themselves before they make rallies against the governor. I need all the information that I can pull in order to convince them of their own mistakes. I came to wikipedia before to read prop 74 for myself and it was great. I found the official arguments which quoted the democratic students verbatum, still without good reasoning. Then I found the proposition from there myself and I was suprised to find that it's only a page long with only two paragraphs worth of changes, all making perfect sence in themselves. Nothing required an expert to understand and it was proven to me by reading it that the democratic party was clearly blatently lying. One more point, I din't have time to look at any others and it turs out that I was against the proposition despite it's good intentions. I merely believe that there are more important issues in education to deal with before we attack bad teachers. Still, in my opinion, the blatency of the lies spread on Arnold, which completely ignored constuctive criticism against the propositions themselves, should be punishable. Please do not forget their lies and propoganda so that it may be recorded by those who will bring an end to such political offences in the future. 01:29, 10 November 2005 (UTC)youngidealist----AgeThe bypass surgery comment may be fair but age? render unto us a break - the man is only 54! - clasqm:The point is that Schwarzenegger isn't the same physically/athletically as he was in the early days--age is definitely a factor. -- TheCunctator''Hercules in New York''For fans of big stupid fun movies, check out ''Hercules in New York''.  It comes on TBS periodically, and is emphatically bad.  :-)  --KQ:I added a link there if anyone wants to check. Ellsworth 21:14, 29 Jun 2004 (UTC)----Image CopyrightsZoe, are you sure all these celebrity images you are uploading are not copyrighted?:Yes.  They're fair use from book jacket covers, as I've said on the upload and the Image page.  -- Zoe::I think Zoe means "No. They're fair use from book jacket covers." If they were ;amp;quot;not copyrighted" (''i.e.'' public domain), then "fair use" wouldn't need to be invoked at all. I have indicated the distinction on Mr. Schwarzenegger's image description page. I think it would be best if people were careful to use the terms "public domain" or "copyrighted but considered fair use" on image description pages, in order to make it clear which they mean. -- Oliver P. 16:08 May 14, 2003 (UTC):I don't understand how clearer I can be, I said they were fair use.  I also said they were from book covers, so I figured that was sufficient for what I needed to say on the image page.  -- Zoe::Well, I was just pedantically correcting your "Yes" to a "No", because it's not true to say that an image being used in "fair use" is "not copyrighted". And the image description page didn't contain the words "fair use". It does now, because I added the words. So everything's okay now. :) -- Oliver P. 09:17 May 15, 2003 (UTC)Whither ''True Lies 2''Has True Lies 2 already been filmed? or will he have to film in it while he is govenor?  dave 17:51, 8 Aug 2003 (UTC):There was some talk about Cameron and Schwarzenegger reuniting for a sequel, but Cameron has since ruled it out. In an interview with Empire magazine he said ''True Lies'' was a good film, but not a classic and therefore didn't warrant a sequel, like ''The Terminator''. Part of the reason for ''T2'' was the low budget of the original film, but ''TL''. Apart from good-natured cameos, he won't be making any movies while he is governor. Scott197827 8/2/2006----About Arnies first appearanceI know this is asking much, but does someone have Robert Altmans The Long Goodbye on convenient media. There is a bodyguard in the film (an unspeaking part) whom Elliott Gould as Philip Marlowe forces to undress (at gunpoint) with his mate. If I am not misremembering, he looked uncannily like the young ''Arnie''. As always, there is a good chance I am talking through an undiscovered ventilation hole under my headware. -- Cimon Avaro on a pogostick* According to IMDb he was "One of Augustine's hoods " in The Long Goodbye(1973) although it was uncredited. M123 16:57, 11 Aug 2003 (UTC)*I don't have that Altman film but I've got a copy of "Pumping Iron" I recorded off cable in the early 1980's that is uncut and shows Arnold and others smoking a joint. Priceless.65.160.16.40 21:33, 11 September 2005 (UTC)----EnronThose of you working on this article might want to incorporate aspects of the following news item: . 205.155.15.1 17:26, 6 Oct 2003 (UTC)----Hitler FanRecently the Sydney Morning Herald unearthed a quote from Mr Swarzenegger from 1975, in which he stated he admires Hitler, on the grounds that he was a little man who rose from nothing to be somebody. Political naivete of course, but in the light of the recent election, maybe worth mentioning in the article if the original source and quote can be found. GRAHAMUK 12:12, 8 Oct 2003 (UTC):Last I heard, the original quote couldn't be found, so it was relegated to a rumor to discredit Schwarzenegger. I guess it could be lumped into a section citing all the things that arose to discredit him at the last minute (such as the groping, the gang-bangs, etc.). ;mdash;Frecklefoot 17:13, 8 Oct 2003 (UTC)I've seen a quote of his around in which he says something pretty close to: I was always admiring very powerful people, like dictators.--Nectarflowed 22:16, 26 Sep 2004 (UTC)This has been utterly debunked. The JDL or another pro-Jewish group has already noted his pro-Jewish personal efforts. He is not under any cloud regarding this. Please look into it more. User:Rex071404|Rex071404 Image:Happyjoe.jpg  22:23, 26 Sep 2004 (UTC)Yeah, I was saying that I think the hitler issue was mistaking what he said.  Here's the quote I was referring to:* "I was always dreaming about very powerful people - dictators and things like that. I was just always impressed by people who could be remembered for hundreds of years, or even, like Jesus, be for thousands of years remembered." ?in the 1977 film "Pumping Iron."   I don't think there's anything wrong with that statement.  He's admiring personal power and being able to do huge things in the world.  There are other quotes related to this discussion at [this page]on About.com.--Nectarflowed 08:29, 2 Oct 2004 (UTC)----Austria not socialist!?In the section where Schwarzenegger (hmm, I guess I should now say Governor Schwarzenegger 8^) explains why he joined the Republican Party, Adam Carr parenthetically added::(In fact, at the time Schwarzenegger came to the United States, Austria was governed by conservatives, and had been since 1945. Austria did not have a socialist Chancellor until 1970.)Now I know very little about Austrian modern history, so I await the opinions of others, but this is very much at odds with the Politics of Austria article. In that article, it states the Austrian government was a coalition between conservatives, socialists and communists from 1945 till 1947, and a coalition between the conservatives and socialists from 1947 until 1966, when the socialists held power in their own right, then variously socialists alone or conservative/socialist coalitions until 1983. (Schwarzenegger left Austria in 1968.) Furthermore, until 1955 a substantial part of the country - including Schwarzenegger's home - was occupied by the Soviets. Now Adam did refer to the Chancellor of Austria as well as the government, and that part seems to be true - but rather misleading as it seems that under the socialist/conservative coalition, they always had a conservative Chancellor but a socialist President.To cut a long story short, it seems that this remark is quite wrong. '''But''' I know very little about Austrian politics, so I'll leave it for comment for a while. -- Roger 10:11 9 Oct 2003 (UTC)Roger is correct that the Austrian Socialist Party was a junior partner in Austrian governments from 1947 to 1966. However:* In 1966 the conservative People's Party won a majority in their own right, before being defeated by the Socialists in 1970. So Austria did ''not'' have a socialist government, in any sense, in 1968 when Schwarzenegger left for the US.::What I was objecting to was "governed by conservatives ... since 1945".* The presence of SPO ministers in the government did not make Austria a "socialist country." The 1947-66 governments pursued policies which in European terms would be considered centrist - I suppose to an American Republican they might seem "socialist."::OK, but a socialist/conservative (and sometimes communist) coalition over part of the country, and Soviet interference in the rest, is hardly "governed by conservatives ... since 1945", either. And the Austrian doctrine of Proporz means that the SPO always controlled at least a few ministerial positions, in particular the Minister for Labour and Social Affairs. (On a peripheral issue, the Schwarzenegger quote doesn't actually say "socialist country".)* The Presidency of Austria is a ceremonial post so the party background of its occupant is not really relevant.::The admittedly terse reference I read on the matter suggests that although he customarily does not use them, the Austrian President actually has immense powers, including the powers to dissolve the Nationalrat, sack the Chancellor, indefinitely delay Acts, pardon criminals, and, in a state of emergency, to rule by decree for up to four weeks. (See also Thomas Klestil.) In practice it seems that the only such power that has actually been used is dissolving the Nationalrat, which has been done twice, both times with the Chancellor's approval. In contrast, although the Chancellor's role is very similar to that of a Prime Minister, he actually has very few constitutional powers. For example, he cannot even sack one of his own cabinet ministers! As a practical matter, the SPO/OVP split of President and Chancellor probably guaranteed the continuation of the custom of Proporz, which meant the socialist party controlled industrial relations.* If Schwarzenegger's home was in the Graz area then he was in the British Zone of Occupation, not the Soviet Zone. In any case the occupation ended when he was seven.::OK, my map was rather small scale, so ''mea culpa''. My point was that having a large chunk of your country occupied by the Soviets is not really compatible with "governed by conservatives".Anyway, feel free to remove the paragraph if you feel it is misleading - it is a very minor point. Adam 11:46, 9 Oct 2003 (UTC)::OK, I've probably already given it far more time than it deserves, but, grrrr, it's taking me so long to save this edit the main page will have to wait. -- Roger 13:46 09 Oct 2003 (UTC)The date 1968 is incorrect. Arnold left Austria in 1966 for Munich, then went to the USA in 1968.  dcxf 11:12, 5 Sept 2004 (BST)*I wouldn't exactly describe Austria as a socialist country, it is no more socialist than any country in western Europe, but that is all beside the point. It is simply a quote from Arnold - it is factually accurate if and only if Arnold actually said it; whether or not his view is 'correct' doesn't matter, the point is to try and explain his views, and give some information about him. - Matthew238 04:06, 19 November 2005 (UTC)*Austria is no socialist country, you have the Austrian_People%27s_Party|ÖVP(Austrian People's Party) and the Social_Democratic_Party_of_Austria|SPÖ(Social Democratic Party of Austria). As Schwarzenegger was born in a countrified area in Styria and you would find a huge support for the ÖVP in such areas, it is no wonder he would support the conservatives in the US too. Which you can also see in his frienship with Edmund Stoiber who is the leader of the bavarian conservative party CSU. Though as I am Austrian too and know the US parties a bit I would have guest he would join the US-democrates as they are even more right winged(in economical and social aspects) then the Austrian conservatives(ÖVP).--Dabese 10:51, 7 December 2005 (UTC):: isn't that precisely the point he makes?? in europe you have: arnarchists, comunists, socialists, social democrats - this is what you have to choose from, more socialist, less socialist, really socialis, does this look like any real choice? It's a joke. And when any non-socialists party wins, it's the "scandal" we all know of! Austria, like pretty much all western europe is now deeply socialist.Nickname in titleDo we really need Arnold's nickname, "Arnie", in the first sentence of this page? George W. Bush's page doesn't say "George 'Dubya' W. Bush" the first time he is referred to. -- Mattworld 21:03, 9 Oct 2003 (UTC):No. ThereIsNoSteve 21:06, 9 Oct 2003 (UTC)::Ahnold and the Governator are common.  Arnie isn't.  Hadn't heard of "Conan the Republican" till it was removed because it has "less than 1000 google hits".  Oddly, google tells me there are 1860. Arnoldlover 02:08, 6 August 2005 (UTC)Request for qualifiers of "World's Largest Chest"Surely Arnold is far behind, say, Dolly Parton, or at least behind silicon-enhanced-porn-stars in the chest department? Who certified him as "world's largest chest" and is it not at least sex-specific??? -- Someone else 03:14, 23 Oct 2003 (UTC):This guy has him beat , and also if the award were "largest muscular chest" numerous others would also surpass him. Maximus Rex 03:21, 23 Oct 2003 (UTC)::OMG! Yes, it did seem somehow wrong, though I would not have thought of Robert Earl Hughes as a competitor!!!! I don't ''think'' Schwarzenegger was particularly noted for having a large chest among bodybuilders. -- Someone else 03:25, 23 Oct 2003 (UTC):::In bodybuilding competition, Schwarzenegger was noted for his arms rather than his chest, IIRC. If anyone from his era could lay claim to the title of 'best chest', it would probably be [Mike Katz]. Slideyfoot 11:19, 22 June 2006 (UTC)::::Arnold never had the world's largest chest, or the world's largest musclular chest - I don't know were anyone would have got that idea from. Even among his fellow bodybuilder's he wasn't the biggest - but bodybuilding isn't just about being the biggest. - Matthew238 02:14, 23 June 2006 (UTC)inauguration photosSecurity at the event was extreme so I wasn't able to get any photos of Arnold, but these other ones may be useful. However, I'm at work right now and don't have the software needed to crop and resize these images. If somebody else can do this before I get home then that would be great. Otherwise I'll get to it latter tonight. :Image:Newsvans at Schwarzenegger inauguration_.JPG, :Image:Arnold Schwarzenegger inauguration-crowd.jpg, :Image:Arnold Schwarzenegger sexual harassment protestors.JPG. --mav 21:31, 17 Nov 2003 (UTC): I'll crop them. rv if not correct. JDR::Cool, thanks! But somebody elese beat you to it. --mav 22:47, 17 Nov 2003 (UTC)Los Angeles Times linksI put back the links to the ''Los Angeles Times'' stories about allegations of sexual harassment, which were removed by another user. The LA Times is a leading newspaper, and the sexual harassment allegations were one of the most contentious issues in his campaign for governor. Many people have formed opinions about the Times' reporting on Schwarzenegger without having actually read it. I think including them is appropriate, and I don't know why they were deleted. If someone thinks they present a one-sided POV, the solution should be to offer a countering report, not to delete these.The LA Times is only a leading newspaper in LA, no one else cares what they have to say. The hve become legends in their own minds. All have been debunked and since retracted. Check it out. Another Hail Mary by the left to stay in power. Sorry folks.--68.80.223.233 13:07, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC)----DegreeThe article states, "meanwhile, he earned a B.A. from the University of Wisconsin, Superior where he graduated with a major in international marketing of fitness and business administration in 1979."  Is there really such a thing as a degree in international marketing of fitness and business administration?  Or did he double major in "international marketing of fitness" and "business administration"?  If that's the case, my question now becomes- is there really such a thing as a major in international marketing of fitness?:The only major I can think of that even comes close is Sports Management.  His  contains no mention of a degree or college education whatsoever.  IMDb [says] he got one in "international marketing of fitness and business administration", but IMDb's trivia bits are notoriously incorrect.  [This] says he majored in "''internal'' marketing of fitness and business administration".  I'm guessing he received his degree in Business Administration, and he chose to focus on international fitness marketing while he was there.:I would recommend removing any degree titles until we can determine what it was for sure.  Maybe say "...where he graduated in 1979 after studying business and marketing"?  Even then, we don't have any really good sources available to verify that, though. Beginning 05:29, Jul 22, 2004 (UTC)Arnold earned his BA degree from the University of Wisconsin-Superior in 1980 in International Marketing of Fitness and Business.  He earned it from attending Santa Monica City College and UCLA extension with 72 credits, earning him an Associates degree then transfering to UW-Superior.   University of Wisconsin-Superior is state university just like the University of Wisconsin-Madison; it is under the state university system. Accredited by The North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCA) and is one of six regional accreditation organizations recognized by the United States Department of Education.girlie menI doubt the last added statement is NPOV.  His comment WAS received well by many, and simply saying that it wasn't is not NPOV.  I thought it was funny and many political correspondents shrugged it off as "so he has a sense of humor, so what?". -- Alterego:I removed the previous sentence because that one seemed NPOV to me.  It seemed to have this "he's doomed" tone to it, and how do we know what's going to happen?  However, even though personally I think 81.63.57.97 10:57, 1 January 2006 (UTC)the controversy is way overblown -- which should hopefully override your doubts about my own personal POV -- you can't possibly be denying that it didn't cause a major uproar if you've been following the coverage.:I'd be fine with changing it to "some", but you can't discuss the remark without discussing who it actually offended.  That's why it's newsworthy to begin with --the number of people who got ticked.  Gay advocacy groups, as well as women's groups and Democratic higher-ups in California, have gotten very worked up over this one.  It was a lead story on most opinion programs this week, and most of the coverage I've come across (including on [NPR], in [the AP], and in the SF) used the word "many".  I didn't feel that I was being NPOV; I felt (and feel) that I was reflecting the story itself. Beginning 19:27, Jul 22, 2004 (UTC)*Outside of CA, esp San Francisca, LA and Sacremento, and other places on the left coast, who really cared about his remark? Let the arrows fall. We laughed about it at the Convention. So what.--Tomtom 21:33, 1 Aug 2004 (UTC)* As a heterosexual, I thought the comment was amusing, but I did a straw poll at the time with several homosexual men I knew and none of them saw anything for them to be offended about. (Chicago). The last comment is definitely not NPOV and needs to be altered. I think the only people who really cared about it were a) the media b) the targets of the comment c) some advocacy groups. Using the SF Chronicle and AP as examples of NPOV is incorrect. The media is not NPOV; discussions of outright political bias aside, it is very difficult to have an NPOV news source. They go for what makes news and sells papers. -Joseph 15:10, 2004 Aug 21 (UTC)** I'd like to second that the statement is simply not offensive. Schwarzenegger always uses the term humorously, mocking society's negative connotation of "girly men." He's also been quite receptive to expansion of gay rights. --Davidstrauss 09:53, 16 Jun 2005 (UTC)*** He's actually very right-winged and "anti-gay". He just says he doesn't have anything against them to get sympathy.* When dealing with the "girlie men" statement, from a detractor's or a proponent's perspective, it's important to not take it out of context.  He said it at a rally of supporters, assumedly in a humorous context with part of his intention being to rev up the crowd (as opposed to being intended as simply a slighting of legislators).  Additionally, I think it should be considered that he used the term again in his speech at the republican national convention, saying voters shouldn't be "economic girlie men."  I think most will find that to be a less questionable use of the term (it's a rhetoric device to encourage strong economic attitudes, and is not being directed at specific people), and that he used it a second time even when he knew the stakes surrounding use of the term were high (i.e. public reaction) could suggest that he does have specific goals when using the term (e.g. to rev up the crowd) as opposed to representing a simple insult or questionable views on woman or masculinity.--Nectarflowed 22:48, 26 Sep 2004 (UTC)* "There is another way you can tell you're a Republican," said Schwarzenegger at the 2004 Republican National Convention. "You have faith in free enterprise, faith in the resourcefulness of the American people, and faith in the U.S. economy. To those critics who are so pessimistic about our economy, I say: Don't be economic girlie men!"Schwarzenegger's comments were jarring because he had, in effect, made his entire recall campaign all about the (presumed) economic consequences of continuing with Democrat Gray Davis, whom he painted as a reckless overspender.  Candidate Schwarzenegger campaigned, he claimed, because of the burden of state debt and its corrosive effects on all levels of society.As someone also concerned about this debt, on ''both'' a state and federal level, what was I to make of Schwarzenegger's "girlie men" comment at the Convention?  Are only "girlie men" concerned about the consequences of debt and government overspending? Why ;mdash; having run the campaign against Davis the way he did ;mdash; was Schwarzenegger now ''mocking'' people who take such fiscal matters seriously?   He may have given his Republican audience a laugh, but face it: our country is an a huge mess thanks to its massive and unsustainable overspending.  And instead of talking about solutions, we had Schwarzenegger, good Republican that he is, kicking sand in the faces of the sissies!For what it's worth, that was my take the moment I heard the "girlie men" comment last year. Sandover 07:48, 28 Apr 2005 (UTC)quotesI'd personally like to see more of his own words as well as some of his classic shoot-em movie one-liners...[anonymous, unattributed]The entire "Quotes" section right now is from his 2004 RNC speech. It's too lengthy; a link to the speech (on wikisources, if folks saw it fitting there, or another static site) would be better. 64.229.39.247 20:44, 6 Sep 2004 (UTC)Socialism in AustriaThe following was removed: ''"The alleged reason for his emigration was socialism in Austria, as Schwarzenegger later suggested in an election campaign for George W. Bush in 2004. Admittedly there were no socialistic governments until Schwarzegger left Austria. A first noteworthy left-wing movement began in the seventies."'' Why was this removed? It's all factual. Quadell (talk) 01:14, Sep 6, 2004 (UTC): By saying "alleged" it implies Arnold had ulterior motive to come to USA other than what he has expressed. That makes it too POV. What is it you are trying to say, that Arnold gave a false reason, or that Austria was not Socialist at the time? Or both? And how do you define Socialistic Governments? I've read Arnold's spokespersons rebuttle about this  and it makes sense - his view was that the policies and practices in Austria leaned towards Socialistic style and that is true -regardless of whether or not Austria was then controlled by a poltical party which called itself "Socialist" or not. You are splitting hairs, looking for a way to call Arnold a liar. User:Rex071404|Rex071404 Image:Happyjoe.jpg  02:14, 6 Sep 2004 (UTC)::Hold up. "You" isn't me. I didn't write the text; I'm just wondering why it was removed. Also, it is accurately described as an "alleged" reason, since he alleged it. I don't want unnecessary doubt cast on his allegations, but I do want them reported accurately. Still, we don't have to use the word "alleged" if you don't like it. I think we should try to reword the sentence if it seems POV to you, instead of just deleting it. How about::::''"Later, when campaigning for George W. Bush in 2004, Schwartzenegger claimed he had left Austria due the socialism in the government there. Critics have noted that there were no socialistic governments there until after Schwarzenegger left Austria, the first noteworthy left-wing movement beginning in the 1970s. But Schwarzenegger explains . . ."'' (You'd have to fill in Schwarzenegger's explanation here, since you seem to be more familiar with it than I am.)::Quadell (talk) 18:05, Sep 6, 2004 (UTC):::He can't have left due to something that didn't exist. --Tothebarricades.tk 19:07, 18 Sep 2004 (UTC): Schwarzenegger has said in other places (places outside of the political sphere) that he was always fascinated with America, even when young.  He's said that when he was young and dreaming, he felt Austria was too small for him, and also that the soviet military presence was terrifying to him.  He's mentioned a number of times his highly positive reaction to american republican politics when he emigrated (specifically fiscal conservatism, "get[ting] government off our backs," and a strong military (citing the soviet military presence in Austria).:I agree with Rex071404 that he probably mean't "policies and practices in Austria leaned towards Socialistic style" '''compared with the comparatively highly capitalistic republican culture he found in America''', and it seems like the critics mentioned in the proposed excerpt offered above by Quadell may be finding false inconsistencies by taking his statement unnecessarily literally.  So I think it can be left out. --Nectarflowed 23:30, 26 Sep 2004 (UTC)You don't have to call yourself a socialist to be a socialist. Look at all the left wingers in my democratic Party. If they ran as they really were they wouldn't get anywhwere, because in the country, being pink is as bad as being red. So they have to hide in the mainstream. As also for the fascists in the republican Party. Neo conservatives and other double-speak aside. --68.80.223.233 13:13, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC)Austria is a socialist country as written in their constitution. It was a socialist country ever since the abolition of the monarchy in 1918. Even as part of the Third Reich it was socialist as the Germany was socialist. Nothing changed except for certain governmental policies. The Nazis were socialist of a different color. So the previous constitution was reinstated following WW2, until replaced with the new constitution which included much of the old one.--Numerousfalx 13:23, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC): You can find an English translation of the Austrian constitution here . This should demonstrate that your rambling has no factual basis. Martg76 04:02, 11 Oct 2004 (UTC):: There must be a lot of prejudice in the USA about European governments. It seems everything that doesn't fit their redneck view of the world and how great a relentless turbo-capitalism is which produces abject poverty, is called socialism. Europeans would in general probably view their rather socialdemocratic governments (centre-left or centre-right) with much more sympathy. But admittedly, that crazy neoliberalism has taken a strong foothold in Europe, driven by American financial interests and corrupt Euro-crats in Brussels. The more open-minded Americans are invited to visit our "brave new world" in Europe.::: I live in Europe and consider it abhorrently Socialist, unbearable almost. So, it's seems it's isn't just Americans saying it. Interestingly enough for someone so worried about Prejudice you seems to have no problem with beschmirching all americans as Rednecks. I guess that's the sweet taste of EuroSocialist inclusive humanitarianism... those who agree get a nice subsidy, those who don't are "Rednecks", brilliant. As for your preocupations with poverty, perhaps you should hand out your own salary to the "poor", or like all socialist do you as well prefer to be an hypocrite attempting to do "charity" with other people's tax money? 85.138.0.158 23:59, 6 July 2006 (UTC):::As I mention above with Arnold quote, whether or not Austria is or ever was socialist is not the point (and saying the Third Reich was socialist is crazy, although many people claim so). Whether or not people in America are "Red Necks" and have an incorrect view of socialism, or of Europe, is also not the point. The point is what Arnold himself believes. The article should simply state this. Whether or not he is right doesn't matter. - Matthew238 04:14, 19 November 2005 (UTC)I'm removing it again. It looks like original research born of some minor blog claims. I'm not willing to trust some wikipedian's summary of Austrian politics as a basis also. Who is the real critic being referred to? keith 00:10, 25 February 2006 (UTC)"Faked?""Schwarzenegger came to the attention of more people in the documentary Pumping Iron (1977), elements of which were faked to add drama.":What is meant by "faked" in this sentence? "Faked" has a very negative connotation and, without proper explanation, creates a very negative view of this film. Would "staged" be a NPOV equivalent? Even that suggests deception. --207.69.138.13 17:14, 21 Dec 2004 (UTC)::"Scripted" is a term sometimes used for scenes with "augmented reality", even when the "script" is made up as they go along and there is little dialog.steroid slanga minor edit on the wording. the article implied 'arnolds' is a commonly used slang term. roids/gear/juice are by far and away more commonly used. also i dropped illicit from 'illicit steroid'. steroids are perfectly legal to posses/use in many countries in the european union and even available over the counter at pharmacies in some countries.'''define illicit:Refers to drugs themselves. All illegal drugs are illicit, but alcohol and tobacco may be either licit or illicit, depending on whether they are used legally or illegally.''' Weightshead 18:14, 12 Apr 2005 (UTC)Hummers and TankI believe his hummers should be mentioned because didn't he get the first civilian hummer? Also his tank with its cost should be mentioned. -Redwolf24 9:42, 5 Jun 2005 (UTC):Yes, for a short time there when you saw the Hummer you knew it had to be Schwarzenegger inside. IIRC, around the time of his election he promised to convert one of his Hummers to use hydrogen fuel. Later,  IIRC, he may have sought funding for a string of hydrogen stations leading out of Sacramento. There have been many L.A. Times articles that mentioned the vehicles. Cheers, -Willmcw 04:57, Jun 7, 2005 (UTC)::He took delivery of the an experimental hydrogen hummer.  Added it.  The size of his fleet and the mileage they get should be mentioned as they speak to his positioning as an environmentalist.Arnoldlover 02:11, 6 August 2005 (UTC):::A hydrogen Hummer defeats the purpose of going hydrogen. People use hydrogen in vehicles to be economical and pollute less. Even though it pollutes less, the Hummer's Detroit diesel engine guzzles that stuff like there's no tomorrow. A man with such a great understanding of economics should know that.--Cocopuffberman 03:22, 21 May 2006 (UTC)minor editI am adding that Schwarzenegger first used his infamous "economic girlie men" term in Ontario, California--a 3 word change. I added it earlier but someone felt like reverting that. I think it is important that the location of that be preserved.Plummeting pollsCognition, his polls have been down for a while now, just as the state legislator's polls have been.--Nectarflowed User_talk:Nectarflowed|T 4 July 2005 10:38 (UTC):Please see the AP article, which makes explict reference to his plummeting numbers. Cognition 4 July 2005 10:39 (UTC)wanted to add that there is a recall petition going on. see link:Moved textI deleted a small page with the following text:Heading - Schwarzenegger Bribery Scandal of July 2005''On July 15 it was reported by the L.A. Times that Schwarzenegger's veto of a bill that would have regulated advertising of body-building supplements was a conflict of interest with his US$8 million of outside income from such advertising.Some commentators, such as a guest on Los Angeles area station KCRW, have gone so far as to call it the biggest bribe for any U.S. governor ever.''Use it or delete it as you see fit. Manning 00:23, July 19, 2005 (UTC)HeightAbout the 6'2 / 5'10 thing, could he really have gotten away with being 5'10 in his bodybuiding career?Unless all bodybuilders lie it seems unlikely he could fake his height - 1) they all walk around and pose in bare feet, 2) surely his height would have been measured before competition as part of his statistics, 3) In Pumping Iron (1977) he poses next to Lou Ferrigno who is said to be 6'5, and he does not appear particularly shorter to me.In the article when it says his "spokespeople" now give his height as 6' who are these spokespeople?  I just worry the height factor is slightly spurious and possibly a factor of malicious journalism, (e.g. the constant rumour mill over Tom Cruise being ridiculously short).:I don't believe this claim. A quick search through Google Images using "Bush Schwarzenegger" finds tons of photos of the two of them together. In each one of them on the screen, Schwarzenegger is considerably taller than Bush. I can easily believe that the height difference is three inches. Nor can I verify the claim that this speculation occurred in a July 2002 issue of US Weekly. The only hits I get for that claim are of mirrors to this page. This seems flimsy grounds to have included the paragraph about Schwarzenegger's height. Can anyone give me a more substantial reference and/or evidence for the claims made in this paragraph? If not, I will delete it. --Susurrus 06:46, 9 September 2005 (UTC)::I believe he was never 6'2" but about 6'1" and down to about 6'0" now. I don't really get the whole "controversy" though, especially thinking he's about 5'10" or whatever. He's obviously got a huge body (and head) which could make him appear shorter, but the thing is there's nothing special or amazing about being 6'0" or over. It's pretty much the norm in Europe. Heck, I'm half asian and still 6'1". While many actors do fudge an inch or two, and Arnold may have fudged 1", it's rare that they'll fudge more than 2". Otherwise they'll be "exposed" too easily.Here is a link to one of the pages from that article in US weekly.Heights are routinely altered in movies, and the heights of bodybuilders never used to be measured. If Stallone really is 5'7" and has always worn lifts, Schwarzenegger would probably have been 6' at his peak.::People get shorter with age so Arnold could have been 6'2" and have shorten since then with age. In the sport of body building, all measurements are recorded.  Fitness people are strict with numbers; ie, weight, fat percentages, muscle size, calories, and also height to weight ratio.:: If you go to wwe.com and check the video of Arnold side by side with Batista, you can see that Arnold is really a tall man, near the 6'2'' mark easily. Batista is said to be 6'5'', so Arnold is around 6'2'', no doubt about it...:Maybe as a young man, but not any more.:The following website  shows him in pictures with other people in order to confirm his height. Of course this doesn't mean he hasn't shrunk in recent years... the guy is ~60 after all!! Enigmatical 00:02, 18 May 2006 (UTC)Nicknames*Results 1 - 10 of about 3,390 for "Austrian Oak" Schwarzenegger.*Results 1 - 10 of about 34,900 for "The Governator" Schwarzenegger.*Results 1 - 10 of about 852 for "Conan the Republican" Schwarzenegger.*Results 1 - 10 of about 1,020 for "Ahhhnold" Schwarzenegger.*Results 1 - 10 of about 683 for Gröpenführer Schwarzenegger.*Results 1 - 10 of about 43 for Boobengrabber Schwarzenegger.So, which should stay and which should go? I've removed all below 1000 (Ahhhnold was close enough, and is just his name with 3 Hs, wow.) --Golbez 20:38, August 5, 2005 (UTC):I think if nicknames are relevant, then put in his nicknames, both flattering and critical. The 1000-Google-hit rule is unduly arbitrary. The standard should be whether it's an actual nickname rather than a one-off dig. Basically, the standard should be whether it's a fact or not. I hear the ''Boobengrabber'' nickname, for example, on talk radio ''a lot'' (which, of course, would not show in Google results). It does exist. It's in current use. And it's directly relevant in the context of the article (lingering harassment-claim perceptions). (Your Google results would change, by the way, if you searched only on the nickname and also included alternate spellings.) Squib 21:07, 5 August 2005 (UTC)::The prior search may have been skewed by including his long, hard-to-spell surname. The point of a nickname is that it is used instead of a real name.  I get 4,090 hits on Gröpenführer alone, and it is the standard nickname applied to him in a national syndicated cartoon, Doonesbury.   "Austrian Oak" is presented not as a common nickname but as an old nickname from pre-internet days, so I wouldn't expect many hits. -Willmcw 21:16, August 5, 2005 (UTC):::I put "ahnold" in since it has 40k alone, plus if you add ahhnold ahhhnold ahhhhnold and ahhhhhnold we aproach 50k.  Clearly above even The Governator. Arnoldlover 02:16, 6 August 2005 (UTC):::Re Boobengrabber... if a couple people on talk radio use it a lot, that doesn't count for much.  What counts is if it sticks... do lots of people pick it up?  Otherwise it's just a couple of jockeys spinningArnoldlover 02:16, 6 August 2005 (UTC)Schwarzenegger and Nixon/HumphreyI removed this from the political affiliation section: "It has often been pointed out that there is one major flaw in this seemingly perfect story; Nixon and Humphrey never debated."  If you read the quote in that section, he says he heard Nixon and Humphrey's press conferences, not a debate. GoCardinal 06:09, 13 August 2005 (UTC)Gigi GoyetteIf someone has the time, add to this article info about Gigi Goyette. Kingturtle 23:13, 13 August 2005 (UTC)Her mother a nazi?I've heard that Arnold's father was a nazi, but I haven't heard anywhere else that Arnold's mother was a nazi. On the subject of nazi connections, shouldn't Joseph P. Kennedy, Sr., grandfather of Maria Shriver, be mentioned as a nazi sympathizer?What most people tend to forget is that MILLIONS of Germans where members of the Nazi party during the period of the Third Reich. If you wanted to make a career in Nazi Germany, you HAD to be a member of the party in power, just as you had to be a Communist Party member to make a career in the USSR. I am not totally sure about this, but I think that many people joined the Nazi party not so much in a belief in Nazism, but as a move to help them in their careers and ambitions. My point: Where all Nazi party members really nazis, '''i.e''': Did they really ''believe'' in nazism?--Konstantin 08:45, 22 August 2005 (UTC):Oskar Schindler. Also, all this sins-of-the-father stuff is kinda tiresome, who cares what people's parents have done. --zippedmartin 15:52, 15 September 2005 (UTC)::National Socialism was just a political movement, like Republican. It only became a "crime" when the Germans lost the war. Imagine if US lost a war to someone, and being a Democrat made you a "war criminal". This is basically the situation thanks to the heebs.:::I think Arnold's father was as 'Nazi', not just a member of the party (if you can even make that distinction), and I do think being a Nazi is a 'crime' - whether or not Germany won or lost the war. I also believe that his father being a Nazi is relevant to Arnold's bigoraphy. I ''do not'' believe, however, that this should be considered a mark against Arnold. You cannot hold someone responsible for something their father did 3 years before they were born. Arnold should be praised or critisised for what he believes and for what he does, not for what his father believed or did. - Matthew238 04:32, 19 November 2005 (UTC)Considering that Arnold did not have a very good relationship with his father, which was highlighted in a recent re-editing of ''Pumping Iron'' where it was said that his reason for not attending his funeral as commitments to body building was in fact just an excuse. In reality he didn't like his father. The only reason ''sins-of-the-father'' proliferates is in the belief that a father actually indoctrinates their child and thus the child ''may'' follow in their footsteps. I doubt whether this is the case here as a result of Arnold leaving Austria at such a young age and thus having very little contact with his father to allow this to happen. Enigmatical 00:07, 18 May 2006 (UTC)Presidential ProhibitionWhile it's true that Arnold cannot become president, it isn't because he's "foreign born", per se.  It's because he isn't a "natural born citizen".  There are foreign born people who receive their US ciitizenship on the basis of having a parent who is a US citizen.  Those foreign born people are natural born citizens because they've held their US citizenship since the moment of birth, and they would be able to become president.  So, it's more correct to state that the reason Arnold cannot be president is because he isn't natural born, or that he's naturalized, in the US.It's often mistakenly believed that the Constitution requires a presidential candidate to be native born, but the Constitution doesn't say this.  It says:  "No person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States, at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President"There have already been three presidential candidates who were not born in the US, and no legal challenge was made against their candidacies:Barry Goldwater (born in the Arizona Territory prior to it being made a state)George Romney (born in Mexico to US citizen parents)John McCain (born in the Panama Canal Zone to US citizen parents)All three of these men were eligible for the presidency because they held US citizenship from the moment of their births, despite not being born in the US.  While some people might argue that Arizona Territory and the Panama Canal Zone counted as US territory, Mexico does not, yet Romney was eligible for the presidency because he held US citizenship from birth.Steggall 16:08, 27 August 2005 (UTC):I have a question - Does it count if we annex the country in question? e.g. if Austria became the 51st state, would Arnold then be eligible? (Unlikely, just exploring the theory) And also, "or a citizen of the United States at the time of the adoption of this Constitution" seems to imply, to me, that since the USA didn't exist when George Washington was born, not including this clause would disqualify him, and everyone for 35 years, from being president. That comma is nasty, though. --Golbez 21:21, August 31, 2005 (UTC)::You're correct that the reason for the "or a citizen of the United States at the time of the adoption of this Constitution" clause was to allow for the fact that orignally there would have been no "natural born" citizens, since anyone born in the original colonies would have been born as British Subjects.  Personally I doubt that if a county or territory were annexed that the people born there prior to the annexation would be eligible for the presidency, because they would only be US citizens from when the annexation took place and would  not be natural born citizens.More importantly, what should probably be debated is whether or not the "natural born" requirement still needs to exist.   Steggall 04:00, September 1, 2005 (UTC)::: Being a natural born citizen means beign a citzen by birth (however that came about), not necesarily being born in the continental U.S.As for whether someone from an annexed country would count as a natural born citizen, what about Hawaii and Alaska when they became states - what happened there. I think people in the annexed country would have to be considered natural born, or else you would have quite an unusual situation where a state's entire population would be prohibited from becoming President. - Matthew238 04:37, 19 November 2005 (UTC):: Remember that prior to being US states, Hawaii and Alaska were US territories and people born there when they were territories were natural born citizens.  Steggall 12:43, 30 November 2005 (UTC)asking Californians for stories about inferior teachersSACRAMENTO, Calif. - Gov.     Arnold Schwarzenegger's campaign posted a form on its Web site asking Californians for stories about inferior teachers to support the ballot initiative to lengthen teachers' probationary period.The form was then removed Wednesday after an Associated Press reporter called to inquire about it.Posted on the Web site the form asked: "Have a story about a teacher who just might not be cut out for the job, yet nothing can be done because of tenure? Please tell us. We'd like to share the stories of Californians like you!"It was part of Schwarzenegger's campaign in favor of Proposition 74, which would boost the probationary period for new teachers to five years from two years. The governor argues that it's nearly impossible for districts to get rid of poor teachers who have been in the classroom for years.Todd Harris, a spokesman for California's Recovery Team, said the campaign "ever even accessed the form. ... There are so many egregious examples of this we never even needed to."Alliance for a Better California, which is campaigning against Proposition 74 and other measures, had planned a counterattack Thursday in Los Angeles. The group will still demonstrate and launch a Web site praising exceptional teachers, spokeswoman Robin Swanson said."Why do teachers have to point out to him that it's a bad idea to attack them? Why are he and his campaign staff playing these sorts of political games?" she said."The governor should have more respect for teachers in his state," Swanson said.Harris said individual examples of problem teachers are a good way to demonstrate the need for a change."The overwhelming majority of California's public school teachers are highly skilled and dedicated public servants. But everybody knows that there are a few poor performing teachers who simply don't belong in the classroom," Harris said.Herr Gröpenführerbefore i start adding things that im unsure about i wnated to check if this is common consensus:He admit's to doing drugs, attending orgies, taking steroids, and the likehe claims that he did not Sexually harass two of the women who claim he didhe claims that he will/would take legal action against them if their allegations were not removedall this is good for his image because people feel that even though he did all these things, they feel that they can trust him to tell the truth as an "Honest Politician":Your first three items are generally acknowledged, I believe. I don't know about the legal action. Your final conclusion is your own, and I don't think anyone would agree with it. We're here to summarize what others have said and done, not to draw our own conclusions. (see: no original research) Please sign and date your talk page entries by typing four tildes (~) at the end. Thanks, -Willmcw 18:42, 27 October 2005 (UTC)RedirectsOut of curriousity I thought I would make a list of all the things that automatically redirect to Arnold Schwarzenegger:* Governator* Gov. Schwarzenegger* Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger* Schwarzenneger* Schwarzenegger* Schwarzeneggar* Arnold Schwartzenegger* Arnold A. Schwarzenegger* Arnold Strong* Ahnuld* The Governator* Ahnold* Arnold Schwarzanegger* Arnold Schwarznegger* Arnold Swarzenegger* Schwarzenegger, Arnold Alois* Herr Gropenfuhrer* Arnold S* The Austrian Oak* Arnold Schwarzeneggarand added a few myself* Governor Schwarzenegger* Governor Arnold* Wigner quasi-probability distributionI heard that his official website had a number of different domain names that linked to it, to take account of all the mispellings of his surname. - Matthew238 04:37, 3 November 2005 (UTC)Arnold SchwarzennegerConan the RepublicanBig ArnieLow approval rating?Who is actually surprised that a man 'elected' with ;30% of the public vote, has a low approval rating? It's not exactly rocket science here--205.188.116.199 18:07, 9 November 2005 (UTC):I'm not at all surprised, because he's a terrible governor and will not be re-elected in November 2006.::And of course there are no worse governers right? LOL!Still,his movie Conan the Barbarian is good to watch.I wish he never got into politics.--85.107.176.129 14:00, 20 May 2006 (UTC)Since he murdered Tookie he will burn in Hell forever, the racist Nazi misogynist.Tookie Stadium"It has been suggested that the name of the stadium be changed in remembrance of Tookie Williams.  Tookie Williams was executed on December 13, 2005 in California after Arnold denied him clemency." I removed this from an edit by 172.146.129.65  - please say who suggested it.  The information would probably be best put in elsewhere in the article, with the rest of the Tookie controversy. Paulleake 22:17, 13 December 2005 (UTC):Ah, so some in Austria want to honor the murderer Tookie Williams. How utterly in character. But why Tookie? Have they already named a stadium for their other national murderer, Adolf Hitler? Excuse me, but European claims of moral virginity repel me. -- Cecropia 03:24, 21 December 2005 (UTC):::If Cecropia claims that "some in Austria" claim "moral virginity" then s/he should restrict her/his last statement to such Austrians, not "Europeans". Why should the Finns, Cypriots, and Irish, for example, get charged with hyprocrisy because of a local issue in a different country hundreds of miles away? Denvoran 00:32, 25 February 2006 (UTC)::On behalf of that stadium's name: have some patience. That it should become something in remembrance of above named convict is highly  unlikely (meant rather as a joke!?). Newspapers say it might become the name of a regional sponsor (which seams likely to me) due to lack of creativity, virtue or suitable options or just plain prospect of beneficial financial support. Nevertheless Arnold IS a big issue in Austria at the moment in public where it comes to the question of how to refert to an Austrian offspring and celebrity who is now a politician with a rather Californian Republican attitude than Austrian, especially when this does not comply with general European standards of human rights (see: death penalty). Maybe I go hike there and take a look tomorrow.Mogwai22 00:40, 27 December 2005 (CET)I changed the wording of the part where it said he approved the execution of Tookie. This is not true, he did not approve the execution, he just refused to personally grant clemency, which he left up to the courts. I am aware the Austrians are claiming he approved the execution, but they are incorrect. --SodiumBenzoate 20:31, 16 December 2005 (UTC)Governator violates free speech with ridiculous law(Excuse the pov heading title)  somewhere in the article. freestylefrappe 05:01, 23 December 2005 (UTC)Fiscally conservative cf. new infrastructure spending"Schwarzenegger .... describes himself as '''fiscally conservative''' "On the other hand, he recently proposed a "$223bn (£127bn) public works programme to improve schools and infrastructure"Does this represent a change in his position on spending? -- 200.141.105.210 16:16, 9 January 2006 (UTC):I don't think it does.  He hasn't raised taxes and is generally pro business.  You also have to consider the general representation of California.  Most of the legislature is made up of Democrats.  It would be harder for any fiscal conservative to successfully cut the size of government in a state like California and still get reelected.  Take a look at his speech at the GOP presidential convention in 2004. In the speech  he's quoted as saying  "If you believe that your family knows how to spend your money better than the government does, then you are a Republican."  Thorburn 00:39, 21 May 2006 (UTC)Arnold has nazi links? Abusive towards woman?I have re-added a link to ArnoldExposed.com (after it was removed by a person who considered it "spam") which claims to have evidence of Nazi connections and Arnold's lack of respect towards woman and other fellow (negro) body builders.I would appreciate it if you could leave this link up, it seems unfair to remove this link when there are so many other unofficial links avaliable.:It's an obvious smear website. Looks like spam to me. --JOK3R 14:37, 19 May 2006 (UTC): clear spamWhy does Filmography have to be organized this way?Is there a particular reason why the table must be organized from his oldest movies first continuing to his most recent?  Is this a Wikipedia standard, or is it just a preference of the user?  I need information about this since I have done this format to the filmography for several actors/actresses. --Nehrams2020 15:48, 6 April 2006 (UTC)Recent edits by MacisteI have to question the recent edits made by User:Maciste as I think perhaps they may be POV. From 1997 I believe that Arnold change focus from motion pictures to running for political power and thus it wasn't a decline in his acting career but instead a personal choice. To say films like Terminator 3, Collateral Damage, 6th Day and the like were a "decline" is a very personal view. What do other people think? Enigmatical 01:58, 30 May 2006 (UTC)Arnold Schwarzenegger stoned (!)Hi there. I don't know if this is a the place, but somewhere around Arnold value, there should be a link to this amazing film:What do you think?Just sums up the modern GOP.We need a pictureWe need a picture at the top of the article. --Folksong 07:22, 5 June 2006 (UTC)Racist towards Asians?That comment seems a little biased. I'm new to this, so I'll feel more comfortable if someone else takes it off, since it doesn't seem appropriate there. Eggos 04:38, 18 June 2006 (UTC)I wholeheartedly agree. It was an un-cited comment, which is PARTICULARLY a no-no for direct quotations. It was not NPOV and has no place in the article in its current form. I removed it. Easter rising 13:18, 20 June 2006 (UTC)He was racist towards Sergio Olivia during their bodybuilding days.BirthdateIn the personal backround paragraph i think we need a mention of his birthdate.If anyone replies please leave me a message because I don't think I'll look at this page for a while. JJ 06:39, 22 June 2006 (UTC)protect page?looks like this article is getting vandalised again, maybe it should be semi-protected again? User:Gryffindor|Gryffindor;/font; 16:15, 27 June 2006 (UTC):I would certainly support that proposal. It is getting a little excessive. Road Wizard 14:53, 28 June 2006 (UTC)