K-Pg extinctions occurred within hours of impact, not months, years, or decades?This is my first interaction here.  Please take it easy on me!  Being brief and to the point: is there a reason why the ideas of H. Jay Melosh are not included in this article? He is apparently well respected and is an expert in impact cratering.  His idea is that essentially all surface life died within HOURS of the impact.  The normal view is that the impact lofted dirt, dust and ash into the atmosphere, stopping photosynthesis, and successively killing off the herbivores then the carnivores which depended on them, in a time period extending into months, years, or decades.  Dr. Melosh's view is that the ejecta from the impact was a very hot gas (?) but cooled when it hit space.  It condensed in space and fell back to earth (worldwide).  The heat generated by its reentry raised the air temperature of the earth up to as much as 1200 degrees Fahrenheit, broiling all unprotected plants and animals.  This process would have occurred within only a few hours of impact (I've heard between 2 and 6 hours).  Burrowing animals and some cave dwellers could have survived, as well as plant roots, since dirt is a good insulator.Is this considered a "fringe" view and not worthy of inclusion in the article, or has no one gotten around to adding it? I'd consider working on it (if others considered it an acceptable addition), but I was hoping to start with something far simpler as my first edit in Wikipedia. Jharvey963 (talk) 17:36, 15 December 2013 (UTC):Very fringe view.  For one thing, stating "all surface life" is just preposterous. Down to the last microbe, eh?  Not likely.  :-)  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/68.19.5.35|68.19.5.35 (talk) 18:04, 8 July 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:Totally wrong, extinction cannot be occurred within hours, the dust can not even disperse all over the earth within hours. Impact eject spherules or shock-minerals had very small size. In more than 1000 km away from crater, these ejecta are no more than 10 cm thick, and in more than 5000 km away from crater, the ejecta can not even formed a ejecta layer. But duration of extinction event or K-Pg event is short, probably no more than 10 or 5 ka (by calculating the sedimental rate of K-Pg clay).  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Aleral Wei (talk • Special:Contributions/Aleral Wei|contribs) 04:51, 22 November 2015 (UTC);;; ;;K-Pg boundary:Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary controversy:Deccan Traps: Gerta Keller, Vincent Courtillot, Blair Schoene and others:vs.:Chicxulub impact: Luis Walter Alvarez, Paul R. Renne and others:A secondary literature with an overview is needed:Summary: Note: K-Pg boundary with a value of 66.23 Ma:US-geologist Paul Renne, Berkeley Geochronology Center: Chicxulub impact (c. 66.038 Ma)::*Deccan Traps: the main phase of eruptions initiated c. 250,000 years before of the K-Pg boundary:*Deccan Traps: more than 1.1 million km3 of basalt erupted in 753,000 ±38,000 years:*C29r/C29n magnetic reversal is at c. 65.552 Ma:Chicxulub impact ocurred after the K-Pg boundary:The Deccan Traps and the Chicxulub impact killed the nonavian dinosaurs and the ammonoids --Chris.urs-o (talk) 20:14, 16 December 2014 (UTC):*, Gerta Keller concludes that, "These data strongly show that the Chicxulub impact predates the KTB and caused no species extinctions at the KTB or at the earlier time of the impact." This is from Keller's site, which has quite a collection of papers refuting the asteroid-killed-off-the-dinosaurs nonsense. The K-T boundary is dated as either 65.59±0.07 Ma or as 66±0.07 Ma. Chicxulub was 300,000 years earlier. The Permian extinction is associated with the Siberian Traps. So the Deccan Traps are the logical suspect here, both for the mass extinction and for the iridium layer often cited as proof of the impact theory. H. Humbert (talk) 02:45, 6 July 2015 (UTC):::That's such a small minority viewpoint that even saying there's a controversy here is a stretch. Science rarely involves (or expects) complete consensus. Geogene (talk) 19:22, 6 July 2015 (UTC)::::When I looked for books on this subject on Amazon,  was the first one that popped up: "Archibald refutes the widely accepted single-cause impact theory for dinosaur extinction." ''Vanished Ocean'' (2010) by Dorrick Stow has a chapter debunking the asteroid theory. I learned from [Bob Sloan]. The man seems to know everything there is to know about dinosaurs, and he certainly doesn't buy the asteroid theory. '''P.S.''' I just noticed [this news article], which is based on research published only a few weeks ago. It argues that Chicxulub triggered a magna plume in Decca, which in turn led to the K-T extinctions. That certainly puts it all together nice and neat. H. Humbert (talk) 05:15, 7 July 2015 (UTC):::::What rot. It may have convinced YOU, but the scientific community is another matter.Special:Contributions/68.19.5.35|68.19.5.35 (talk) 17:54, 8 July 2015 (UTC)::::::Do you realize that "the scientific community" includes many people who do not agree with you, whatever your opinion might be, and that you do not speak for it? H. Humbert (talk) 03:49, 9 July 2015 (UTC):::::::H. Humbert Keller's "evidence" are easily countered, but Keller et al consistently ignore these……  In, 2014, she published her summary paper on Geological Society of America Special Papers. She summed all the evidences that violate the Chicxulub impact theory, but these evidence are easily countered, noted that she changed the Chicxulub age to predate the K-Pg extinction about 100~150 ka, not 300 ka. In her paper, she concluded the upper spherules (El Penon section) layer had been reworked, and the original(oldest) spherules layer is blew the event deposit (sandstone that above upper spherules layer) 4~9 m, which means the impact is 100~150 ka before K-T extinction. However, the oldest spherules layer is strongly slumped,  ball-and-pillow-structure down from the upper spherules layer. The upper is reworked, because it transport by tsunami backwash. Also, Keller concluded that the only evidence of disturbance is a small (;2 m) overturned gravity flow within a spherule layer sandwiched between more resistant marl layers along a slope at Loma Cerca;/blockquote;  There are plenty of evidence of disturbance published like 5 years ago, but Keller ignored. Another one of the cornerstones of her hypothesis is based on the impact eject is separated from the K-T boundary by 50 cm of limestone with five glauconite clay layers, common burrows and a planktic foraminiferal. However, this just misidentifications of dolomite crystals as forminifers, and limestone actually is cross-bedded dolomitic sandstone. Yet Keller has never offered to have her identifications tested, so she must be afraid the truth will come out. In 2013, Renne et al performed high-precision Ar/Ar dating on bentonites at K-Pg boundary and tektites from Chicxulub impact, and difference between their ages are only 5 +/- 27 ka. Thus, the hypothesis that the Chicxulub impact predated the KPB by ~150 ky is unsupported by Ar/Ar dating. Aleral Wei (talk) 04:11, 21 November 2015 (UTC)  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Aleral Wei (talk • Special:Contributions/Aleral Wei|contribs) ;;; ;;::::::::Aleral Wei The sources of this article show that it's not just sole Gerta Keller who thinks that Chixculub impact can not be responsible for K/T extinction, nor that the dating it the only clue for that hypothesis. For me, it's actually enough evidence to make LIP hypothesis more credible than impact hypothesis. --User:David Jaša|David Jaša (User talk:David Jaša|talk) 16:16, 17 February 2016 (UTC)::::::::::::::::Containing the runaway reference Geogene (talk) 20:44, 17 February 2016 (UTC);::::::::: I think you misunderstand what I'm tring to say. I do agree that Deccan can cause mass extinction, but I do not agree that Chicxulub impact predates the K-Pg boundary. Cretaceous asteroid impact would cause extinction but extinction magnitude would be lower if synergistic stressors had not already ‘primed the pump’ of extinction (Deccan volcanism).Aleral Wei (talk) 18:22, 17 February 2016 (UTC)New impact theoryThere is a new impact theory that is gaining a lot of traction as being more plausible than the dust cloud theory, it's not mentioned in this article, but definitely should be. I first learned of it on  of Radiolab. The theory goes that the asteroid that hit caused such a rapid rise in tempurature and subsequent acid and "glass" rain, that every dinosaur and plant on the surface, worldwide, died within a matter of hours. Only smaller dino's, deeper sea creatures and mammals, insects, etc, that were buried in the ground survived. -War wizard90 (talk) 03:13, 24 January 2015 (UTC):The article already mentions both acid rain and global firestorms as possible extinction mechanisms.  calls the firestorms into question. Mikenorton (talk) 13:10, 24 January 2015 (UTC)::I agree that the causes described above according to the Radiolab programme are already covered. As to the new paper, it only covers the heat pulse, not other suggested causes such as a rain of red hot ejecta. As it is only one paper, it would be premature to mention it. Dudley Miles (talk) 14:07, 24 January 2015 (UTC):::I agree that it's far too early to add such a new paper as a source in the article - I only mentioned it to show that what's new is changing all the time. Mikenorton (talk) 14:41, 24 January 2015 (UTC)::::The article doesn't mention the "glass" rain, which is the major new point in this hypothesis. That the crater impact as it was driving into the earth became so hot that it caused the rock to become gaseous and was actually ejected out into space. In space it was then cooled into billions of tiny pieces of glass that were pulled back into the atmposphere by Earth's gravity. Most of this "glass rain" burned up in the atmosphere, causing the entire earth to become extremely heated (I believe in the epdisode it says something like 1200° F, but don't quote me on that) in a matter of hours, killing almost every living thing above ground, I don't see this theory mentioned anywhere, maybe I'm just missing it? -War wizard90 (talk) 23:47, 30 January 2015 (UTC):::::Because it has not yet been accepted by the scientific community? Because it is only ONE paper, not yet "tested" via mathematical models by other scientists?  It's not like this has not been considered before - I've read proposals like that for at least some 20 years in various paleo-forums, etc.Special:Contributions/68.19.5.35|68.19.5.35 (talk) 17:51, 8 July 2015 (UTC)added new important infoI'm kind of new here, and I added a sentence on the asteroid not being the primary cause of the extinction.  is the source. Can someone add more info?Theyester (talk) 21:15, 1 February 2015 (UTC):Actually what the source says is that firestorms were unlikely to be the main cause of extinction event - to quote from the source "multiple models have showed such an impact would have instantly caused devastating shock waves, tsunamis, and the release of large amounts of dust, debris and gases that would have led to a low light levels and a prolonged cooling of Earth’s surface. The darkness and a global winter would have decimated the planet life and the dependent animals." As with all brand new research, best to leave mentioning it until we see whether the results are accepted by other scientists. Mikenorton (talk) 21:21, 1 February 2015 (UTC)::Firestorm has never been regarded as the main cause, but 100~500 giga tons of sulfur released from impact is. There are many evidence indicate rapid and short-term global cooling at K-Pg boundary. —Preceding unsigned comment added by Aleral Wei (talk • Special:Contributions/Aleral Wei|contribs) 04:51, 22 November 2015 (UTC);;;Extinguished? Commentregarding: "...it is estimated that 75% or more of all species were extinguished by the K–Pg extinction"Is there a better word than extinguished?like: Eliminated, Annihilated?--CuriousMind01 (talk) 16:04, 22 December 2015 (UTC):"Made extinct" would probably be adequate. Repetition for the sake of clarity is not a sin. Geogene (talk) 19:52, 22 December 2015 (UTC)