Classical Elements and States of MatterWe're having a bit of a disagreement here and I'd like to clarify my concern.  I know of no historical source (either a historical document or writing by a modern historian) that makes the identification. The sources you've presented indicate that modern scientists and science writers make the connection.BTW, Philip Ball was trained in Chemistry and Physics; he describes himself as a science writer, not a historian of science.To this historian of science the comparison sounds like the kind of anachronistic writing that tries to make the ancients sound modern. It's certainly not mainstream historiography and, lacking evidence, it shouldn't be presented at all as the view of historians of science. SteveMcCluskey (talk) 13:57, 18 February 2014 (UTC):OK, thanks for explaining and I'm fine with the latest: switching from 'scientists' to 'science writers' and leaving out historians (it helps avoid the impression I was concerned about, that scientists are currently exercised by the concept).—User talk:Machine Elf 1735|Machine Elf 1735 15:27, 18 February 2014 (UTC)Four fundamental interactions as a modern representation of the ElementsThe four fundamental interactions of physics, being electromagnetism, gravitation, strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force.If the electromagnetic force (as defined by QED) results in the phenomenon of light and the photoelectric effect could not all of those things be understood as the classical element of Fire?  In this way, the weak nuclear force is observed to be responsible for things breaking down and decaying (as in nuclear or particle decay), also being responsible for Electroweak unification.  An ancient analog could be the Element Air.  The rest follow quite naturally: strong nuclear force (holding particles together) = element Earth, and gravitation (bending spacetime and causing accelerations) = element Water.There is even a school of thought in fringe particle physics that identifies the various phenomenon (electromagnetic radiation, matter, color charge, and electric charge)  as the basic elements of the Universe (To see a paper from one of it's primary advocates, follow: I don't think we should neglect this in the Modern Views Section.  Agreed?~~mdforbes500~~:For Modern Views you're suggesting: EM=Fire, Weak=Air, Strong=Earth and Gravity=Water? I think the Table of correspondences article might be better.—User talk:Machine Elf 1735|Machine Elf 1735 01:32, 29 March 2014 (UTC):Or better still, the Wu Xing article.—User talk:Machine Elf 1735|Machine Elf 1735 15:15, 29 March 2014 (UTC)Reliable sourcesUser:Bladesmulti recently asked on my Talk page: "What you have found actually unreliable there?"   This raises the issue of a basic problem with many edits to this article, especially in the section on the elements in Hinduism.  There is a tendency to make claims of Hindu beliefs on the basis of citations to books that aren't scholarly studies but are popular studies of "Natural Healing" and "Vegetarian Cooking" some of which User:Spinningspark rightly deleted.In my view, discussion of the Classical Elements in any culture should have a strong historical component, since these traditional beliefs do not correspond to modern concepts of the elements held by any culture.  There are serious scholarly studies of traditional concepts of the elements in early Indian culture and these should be the basis of encyclopedic discussions of this topic.  --SteveMcCluskey (talk) 19:26, 1 December 2014 (UTC):I fully agree with that and would be in favour of removing all non-compliant material. User:Spinningspark|Spinning;/b;User talk:Spinningspark|Spark;/b; 19:37, 1 December 2014 (UTC)::Thanks for writing. My main objection was that your change had added a theory about the 9th century text back to the article. I had no issue with the citations that I had added before right after I had read the recent change(by Spinningspark) and the edit summary. Bladesmulti (talk) 04:20, 2 December 2014 (UTC)The 6 Secondary Elements to Mention ?I read somewhere that there are 6 secondary elements which are part of the original 4 (where they combine). They are steam, magma, smoke, mud, fog/cloud, and dust respectively. F,W,E, and A represent the four of fire, water, earth, and air. Thus, F+W --; steam. F+E --; magma. F+A --; smoke. W+E --; mud.W+A --; fog/cloud/mist. and E+A --; dust.ill try to locate the diagram that shows this. Gizziiusa (talk) 06:27, 15 December 2014 (UTC)gizziiusa:Is this some new wave mystic shit or is your claim that classical thinkers had a concept of "secondary elements".  If the former, then it does not belong in this article, if the latter, we need a source.  Clearly there was a belief that all materials were composed of the primary elements in some combination or other, but I'm not so sure that there was a definite group of secondary elements, at least not in the way that you mean. User:Spinningspark|Spinning;/b;User talk:Spinningspark|Spark;/b; 23:19, 28 December 2014 (UTC)Cosmic Elements in BabyloniaI was suspicious of this section since I've never come across anything similar in my readings. It seems to hinge upon a paragraph in the paper referenced there, "A consideration of Babylonian astronomy within the historiography of science" by Professor Francesca Rochberg (currently at Berkley). The paragraph from the paper reads as follows: "Whereas the Babylonian cosmogonic myth represents the creation of the cosmos as an allegory involving personified cosmic elements (sea, earth, sky, wind), celestial omens as well as astronomical texts consider and seek to describe the behavior of the phenomena, regardless of their associations with deities."Reading that paragraph led me to the conclusion that she was not talking about the classical elements at all. I contacted her via email and she did confirm for me that she meant nothing of the sort (she specifically said she could have used the word "parts" there instead of elements). Unless someone knows of a relevant source, I suggest removing that section entirely.AuldDragon (talk) 09:48, 24 January 2015 (UTC)