UntitledPeer review template has been removed, please see the bottom of the page.Alternate long history?So alternate history is about fictional worlds in which one or more historical events unfolded differently from how it did in reality, but what about alternate history on larger scales such as evolution of life on Earth or alike?I guess that's not alternate history anymore but something else and just related. Is there an article for that? Or maybe I'm wrong and that would also be part of alternate history? (In that case however parts of this article would need to be rewritten.)Basically it's '''alternate recent history of humanity vs. history of the Earth'''...and actually also '''vs. alternate long history of humanity''' (prehistory and human evolution).Thinking about this since I wasn't sure whether or not to categorize The Long Earth under ''alternate history novels''. It's not an alternate history novel as outlined in this article, so what to do now?--'''F'''ix'''uture''' (talk) 18:46, 22 August 2015 (UTC)Alternate vs. Counterfactual HistoryIn the section definitions we read that "Alternate history is related to but distinct from counterfactual history", yet in history of alternate history literature (awful wording and all), we read that "The earliest example of an alternate (or counterfactual) history is found in Livy's Ab Urbe condita".  AUC is ''not'' fiction, it is history, and therefore the section in question is, according to the definitions section, not counterfactual history but alternate history.  And yet the section on the history of alternate history implies that counterfactual and alternate history are the same. (Likewise, the counterfactual history in Machiavelli's Discourses, also mentioned, is not fiction, nor is ''If it had happened otherwise''). Caeciliusinhorto (talk) 21:59, 14 November 2015 (UTC)Notable examplesAnyone willing to help compile a list and add it to this page? I feel that pages that refer here would be my first choice. Perhaps even a table of publication date, accuracy, followed accepted history until when, etc... That sort of thing.One other point of discussion: is Orwell's 1984 in any of these similar categories? Lookmomnohands (talk) 05:58, 24 November 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 3 external links on Alternate history. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20080516015933/toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:21, 31 December 2015 (UTC)