Canadian English''by no means is CanE included in AmE; many will argue that CanE is halfway between BrE and AmE; and that's not even the reason why there's no "Commonwealth" dialect''Would you expound, JackLumber?My understanding is that whether by direct lineage or by comparing modern attributes, Canadian English is a variety of American English and not of British English (while English spoken in the remainder of the Commonwealth represents varieties of the latter).  Even much of the “British” spelling and vocabulary of Canadian English date back to North America before Loyalists fled the thirteen colonies.Do linguists consider Canadian and American English (“U.S. English?”) to be two branches of “North American English?”  Even if that is so, although there is English ''in'' the Commonwealth, there isn't a single or collective variety of English representative ''of'' the Commonwealth.  It should be made clear that this is a geographic survey article, and may examine some commonalities of English throughout Commonwealth countries, but that “Commonwealth English” isn't a recognized branch of the language.''—MichaelZ.2008-10-1401:25z;''::''In response to Michael:'' While the verbal pronunciation of English in most of Canada is closer to the most common English pronunciation in the United States than to, for example, the Received Pronunciation form of English in England, I can assure you, living in Canada and having attended the Canadian (British Columbia) education system, that the accepted written form of English in Canada is the Commonwealth form.  American influence attenuates standard Commonwealth spellings to a degree, but if you spelled ''centre'' or ''metre'' as "center" or "meter", as an example, in a Canadian school, you would be marked wrong.  What's more, the "we're not Americans" pride in Canadian nationalism, combined with national media institutions like the CBC and the Canadian Press style book, reinforce the Commonwealth spelling conventions in Canadian society beyond school graduation.::For those unfamiliar with spoken English in North America, it is important to note that as one moves westward in both Canada and the United States a sort of default pronunciation dominates in each country, and those pronunciations are similar.  In the eastern part of the continent, pronunciations of English are much more localised and idiosyncratic.  Since the English language has been established longest in the east, it has had a longer time to develop local accents and dialects.  Compare, for example, coastal southern, New York, Boston/New England, Canadian maritimes and Newfoundland pronunciations.::Special:Contributions/96.50.0.245|96.50.0.245 (talk) 23:01, 8 September 2014 (UTC)DialectsThere are very few differences in English between countries of the Commonwealth.  It is not true to say that they have "developed their own native varieties of the language".  There are not different "varieties" of English. These are not even dialects, as properly defined. There are regional and national differences, but these are only slight. Much less pronounced than the differences between counties of England in previous centuries. The only national variation that could be considered a different dialect is Indian English.  That has some obsolete and unique words and bizarre sentence forms that are peculiar to India.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/124.197.15.138|124.197.15.138 (talk) 02:39, 28 May 2011 (UTC);; ;;This article should not even exist. The term commonwealth English is meaningless as the differences between them are too huge (eg Indian, British, Malaysian, Canadian, and Australian English are all as different as English varieties get). As an example, Canadian English resembles American English much more than it does British English, as does Australian English resemble New Zealand English far more than it does British English. As such grouping "commonwealth English" on one hand and "US english" on the other is totally meaningless as the varieties are, in the cases of Canada and Australia, as distinct from UK English as US English is, and in the cases of Indian or Singaporean or Malay English considerably more different again. It is misleading not to mention pointless to have this sort of an article. Saruman-the-white (talk) 11:32, 10 June 2012 (UTC)This is such a funny POV Americo-centric article!This article should be deleted - unless someone who, 1) knows about linguistics, or 2) can reference this complete Americo-centric rubbish, and can write something of worth. It's a nonsense to try to gloss over "English as she is spoke" by referring to "native speakers" and other such rot. ''"Small communities of native English speakers can be found in Zimbabwe, Botswana and Namibia; the dialects spoken are similar to South African English".'' - I nearly fell off my chair! Francis Hannaway (talk) Francis Hannaway 22:10, 17 July 2012 (UTC)I notice that in some articles (for instance biscuit) there is a reference to Commonwealth English.  Shouldn't this be Standard English?  There is no such thing as Commonwealth English, as English in India - for instance - is now very far from standard?Special:Contributions/203.184.41.226|203.184.41.226 (talk) 01:14, 10 August 2013 (UTC)