Band issuesAnyone know when the "Minuteflag" (Minutemen plus Black Flag) album came out?  I would add it to the list but don't know the year.  (1985; thanks)----I've decided to make Black Flag (band) redirect to here for now. I know there is a newspaper of this name also, but we have so little info about it, and the band is so much better known, that I think a note about the paper at the bottom of the page will suffice, at least for now. For a few weeks, we actually had articles on the band at both Black Flag and Black Flag (band), so this arragement is better than that, if nothing else. --CamembertDisambigMay as well turn this into a disambiguation page, so here goes. Damaged Again----I've merged the content of Black flag (flag) into this page, because it was essentially a second disambig. However, I'm not 100% happy with this solution. Links to disambig pages are considered bad, and Black Flag has them, as it fits in with red flag, white flag, etc. On the other hand, it's silly for readers to have to go through two disambigs. User:Benc|;bull;BencUser_talk:Benc|;bull; 09:57, 16 Aug 2004 (UTC):I disagree with this merge.  I don't think black flag (flag) really is a dab page, so I've renamed it to list of black flags and split it back out.  Two clicks is no hardship, especially as it reduces the clutter on this page for those not looking for a flag.  And one should really fix links to go straight to the desired target, like the template advises. jnestorius(talk) 19:24, 5 June 2007 (UTC)SuggestionI think that black flags are waved in Northern Ireland as a sign of curfews but I have no actual source for this, someone should look it up.Black Japanese Naval Flag during WWIII have heard some legend of a Japanese unit using a "rising sun" flag but the sun on the flag was black.  Is this true?Cameron Nedland 19:42, 28 January 2006 (UTC)Black BannerShouldn't this link to Black Banner (disambiguation) ? -- Special:Contributions/67.70.35.44|67.70.35.44 (talk) 04:41, 3 November 2014 (UTC)