Early commentsI moved the following from the main page, as while it's been edited a bit it's clearly a derivative work of the copyrighted biography at -- and so also copyright to that original author. I'm assuming that the original poster was ''not'' Bill Mumy or webmaster Jesse Tyler and didn't have permission to release this to Wikipedia. I apologize in advance if it was in fact one of those two people who put it up here...."Born February 1, 1954, Charles William Mumy, Jr.  Noted entertainer and a well known figure in the science fiction community.  He began his professional career at the age of 5 and has worked on over 400 television shows, 16 motion pictures, various commercials, scores of voice over work as well as working as a musician, songwriter, recording artist, and writer.He is probably best known as "Will Robinson" from the classic 1960s television series Lost In Space and as Lennier, the alien Ambassadorial aide suffering from unrequited love in the series Babylon 5.Bill is also a well-known musician who plays guitar, bass, keyboards, banjo, mandolin, harmonica, percussion and sings. He has released three solo CD's, "Dying To Be Heard", "In The Current", and "Pandora's Box" from Renaissance Records.In 1978 Bill and his partner, Robert Haimer, officially formed the infamous "quirky-rock duo"--BARNES AND BARNES . They are known worldwide, and have recorded 9 albums on Rhino and CBS Record labels. They also released a feature length home video titled "Zabagabee" featuring a Collaboration of BARNES AND BARNES short films. Their infamous "FishHeads" song placed #57 in Rolling Stones Top 100 Videos of All Time. In 2000, Ogio Records released the 24 song "Yeah: The Essential Barnes ; Barnes" CD.Bill was nominated for an Emmy in 1991/1992 for his original song composition for ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND for Disney which he wrote 105 songs for 100 episodes. He also scored three episodes of the award winning PBS series "The Universe and I" and contributed songs and themes to "Santa Barbara", "TV Guide Looks At", "Hard to Hold", "Plainclothes", "Archie", "Sunshine", "Bless The Beasts ; Children", "The Simpsons", and many other film and television projects.Bill and Miguel Ferrer are currently in a rock and roll band called the JENERATORS. Their first CD and cassette titled the "Jenerators" was released in 1994 on Asil Records. Their second CD produced by Frank Wolf titled "Hitting The Silk" was released in November of 1998 on Wildcat Records. They currently perform in the Los Angeles area when possible.If that is not enough, Bill has also worked on various children albums as well. "The Yogi Bear Environmental Album: This Land Is Our Land" a 1993 release on Rhino Records/Hanna Barbera, "The Dinosaur Album" also a 1993 release on Rhino Records, and his current album "Kiss My Boo Boo" which has been released on the Infinite Visions label.Mumy is the co-creator with Peter David of the award winning children's television series Space Cases.  The two have also written screenplays, comic books and short stories together.He currently lives in the Hollywood Hills with his wife, Eileen, and their two children, Seth and Liliana.  By all reports Mumy is a personable, charming man with a wicked sense of humour."Bill Mumy Clean-upHey, I have done a clean-up in order to give the article a little more form to work with.The bio box, bio headers, rearranging some things--nothing was actually deleted; just shuffled around.Information is still needed--who is tending this page?Information can be put in better chronological order; elaborated on; quotes added; filmography boxed, etc. Adopt it full-time for a week. I'll be glad to help.There should be a chapter/paragraph with MUCH more each on ''Lost in Space'', ''Dear Brigitte'', ''Twilight Zone'', etc. MUCH more on his recent TV. Plus a representitive TV appearance list.Clean it up and get it rated. My last Wiki actor bio got an "A" rating; there's not too many of those out there. Mumy deserves as much.Wiki is an encyclopedia, so it's "Mumy", not "Bill".Mumy has it both ways; he was a hit when he was my age growing up, and now he is as hip as ever with today's kids.trezjr 01:17, 24 August 2006 (UTC)Mumy Select FilmographyI was planning to box Mumy's filmography--select, of course--using all of his motion pictures and some of his TV work with a link to his complete filmography at IMDB. (400 TV appearances!!!) This would look a lot better, and make space for a photo or two.Does anyone have a problem with that?trezjr 18:03, 27 August 2006 (UTC)UpdateI've started the process this evening.I've gotten all of his films listed.His important TV work should be next (Twilight Zone, Bewitched, Munsters, Lost in Spece,  Babylon 5 and Star Trek)--maybe tomorrow night, unless anyone else would like a try.Meanwhile, the Bio chapters are also in desperate need of expansion.trezjr 01:06, 28 August 2006 (UTC)BirthdayBilly Mumy will be 53 years old on 2007-02-01ya, so......like anyone that reads the article knows this.trezjr 00:20, 11 September 2006 (UTC)Fish Heads (fish kep) Fish Heads lyrics in English and Yiddishby '''Barnes ; Barnes''' (Yiddish translation: Hershl Hartman):note: Seth Mumy asserts dad Bill gave permission for this.Chorus:fish kep, fish kep,kaylekhdike fish kepfish kep, fish kep,frest zey oyf, zat!(2X)in frimorgn,lakhedike fish kepun in ovnt,shvimen zey in zup.(Chorus)freg a fish kopvos aleyn du vilst nor:er vet shtumen,zi blaybt shtum.(Chorus)in kino mit a fish kopbin ikh mitgegangenon a groshn geltiz zi arayn.(Chorus)zey shpiln nit in pilke (or: beyzbol),zey trogn nit sveters,zey toygn nit vi tentser,zey klapn nit in poyk.(Chorus)(bridge)kaylekhdike fish kep zet men keynmol trinken kaputshino in italyenishe restoranen mit ori'entalishe froyen…yoh…Chorus (4X)(after 2nd:) Yum! (4th: a cappella) (end:) Yoh!Chorus:Fish heads, fish heads,Roly-poly fish heads.Fish heads, fish heads,Eat them up, yum.(2X)In the morning,Laughing, happy fish heads.In the evening,Floating in the soup.(Chorus)Ask a fish headAnything you want to.They won't answer.They can't talk.(Chorus)I took a fish headOut to see a movie.Didn't have to pay toGet it in.(Chorus)They can't play baseball,They don't wear sweaters,They're not good dancers,They don't play drums.(Chorus)(bridge)Roly-poly fish heads are never seen drinking capuccino in Italian restaurants with Oriental women…yeah…Chorus (4X)(after 2nd:) Yum!(4th: a cappella) (end:) Yeah!- Sparky 06:15, 29 March 2007 (UTC)Who is Sam?I was just reading Bill Mumy's bio and came across the following:"Mumy's friendship with Jonathan Harris began in 1965, when they worked together on Lost In Space. The two had a wonderful chemistry on the set and shared a true devotion off the set. With Sam's car accident and death in 1977, Harris's friendship strengthened with Mumy, as their relationship would grow even stronger."Who is Sam?Sunfox 19:03, 16 August 2007 (UTC):yes, i came across that the other day and was just as baffled. since the entire paragraph is unsourced, i'm wondering if it should just be pulled? --emerson7 | Talk 19:44, 16 August 2007 (UTC)According to Jonathan Harris' biography, his dad died in a car accident and was named Sam.  I'm assuming that's who they're talkin about, but you need to let the reader know that and not have to look at another bio to figure it out yourself.SunfoxMumy, Harris, Williams and TocquignyDoes the last parenthesis mean that Mumy was a fan of Williams, not Harris, contrary to what Tocquigny said? Or what? —Tamfang (talk) 03:16, 15 November 2011 (UTC)Bill Mumy’s ethnicityOut of curiosity because “Mumy” seems to be such an unusual name, especially for such a short one, I asked him on his guest book at his official website what ethnicity is his name.  He answered Pennsylvania Dutch but seemed to know no other information.  (“Pennsylvania Dutch” usually refers to Mennonite or Amish Germans (or Swiss-Germans) who originally settled in the Lancaster County area of Pennsylvania.  (“Dutch” was a corruption of “Deutsch.”))   Since the ethnicity of the subjects of many celebrity articles is noted, I thought someone might add this after the information regarding who his father is and add a link to his website.  I’m not good at sourcing links.Also, it might be noted towards the beginning of the article that the family pronounces the name “Moo’me.”  It’s the bane of his existence that so many pronounce it as he were a long deceased Egyptian potentate.HistoryBuff14 (talk) 14:32, 10 January 2012 (UTC)