Untitledthe use of a leading comma (a comman out in front) to indicate another name is not a good idea in an encylopedia aimed at a general reader.  Not many people are familiar with that convention.  On the point of multiple names ('''especially when they're just translations into other languages'''), it might be best to simply list them at the BOTTOM of the entry where the long list of names doesn't interfere with the prose of the article.  Remember, this is supposed to be an encyclopedia.-----------Ok, that is a good idea user:H.J.Name DiscussionAnyone have any opinions on what the proper naming conventions for Boleslav I, Boleslav II, and Boleslav III should be? The Naming Conventions Project indicates that the most commonly recognized English-language form of the name should be used- this would presumably be the Latin ''Boleslaus''. It was suggested at Guidelines for the spelling of names of Polish rulers that pre-royal names should be local in name while royal names should be English/Latin in name, but I do not know if that was ever accepted.I personally prefer "'''Boleslaus I the Cruel''' (Czech: ''Boleslav I. Ukrutný'')" with the article name Boleslaus I of Bohemia, but want to see what other people think before I propose a move. Olessi 21:31, 20 September 2005 (UTC)Sister or daughter married Mieszko?This article states Boleslav ''"arranged for his sister Doubravka to marry the Piast prince Mieszko I in 965"''. However other sources, including the articles on his daughter, Doubravka, and Mieszko I say that Boleslav I was the father, not brother, of Doubravka (also called Dobrawa) who married Mieszko I in 965.: One Boleslav (I) was her father, the other one Boleslav (II) was her brother. Where is the problem? There were mane bearers of that name - Boleslav. --Franta Oashi (talk) 02:51, 9 February 2015 (UTC)Margrave of the Ostmark"...presumably consisting of border raids ... between Boleslav on one side and the margrave of the Ostmark on the other, reached its conclusion in 950 when Boleslav signed a peace..." -- however: the Ostmark / Austrian March wasn't created until 955 (see History of Austria). So who was this margrave of the Ostmark? Chl 19:21, 27 January 2007 (UTC)Perhaps the Saxon Eastern March. The Ostarrichi-to-be, can be more precisely referred to as the Bavarian Eastern March. --Karel Kocourek 21:40, 3 April 2007 (UTC)Death date discrepancyBoth 967 and 972 are given as death dates; any firm information?; no help from LC--FeanorStar7 21:41, 26 May 2007 (UTC)Incorrect illustrationThe second illustration picture (is incorrectly pasted to the article about Boleslaus I. In fact it depicts St. Vojtěch/Adalbert while trying to persuade the duke Boleslaus II, son of Boleslaus I (not to allow selling christian slaves to pagan lands. By the way, this (is a pen drawing after the disputed picture.If there is desirable to append more than one illustration picture, than it could be this one:This is undoubtedly the most contemporaneous depiction of Boleslaus I, although as a very young man. Naturally it would need some commentary for the reader, to help them distinguish between the two dukes.  Karel Kocourek 21:11, 30 October 2012 (UTC)