Why the page mergeI have left the version of Anarchist that I just deleted below, but first let me explain why I merged it with anarchism.#The top half of this article was a pointless, incomplete summary of Anarchism. Why keep two pages up to say the same thing?#The next portion was useful content that would do very nicely on the anarchism page, so I moved it there.#The next portion were quotes, which, while interesting, didn't serve much of a purpose. WikipediaIsNotAQuoteRepository and all. After that was a link to a page that was much less informative than our excellent Anarchism page.The concept of anarchist and anarchism seem so close that I can't understand why we'd maintain two seperate pages.--DanKeshet::I disagree with this and have restored the original page. Anarchism and Anarchist are distinct topics and should have separate entries. The history of what it means to be an anarchist and how people have labeled anarchists in the media is not the same and a discussion of anarchism. You may not like quotes, but I think they are relevant here in terms of how anarchists have been viewed.If you want this page to be Views of anarchists or Anarchists in the media or Famous anarchists, then let's make one of those. In any case, I find it very confusing to have this article summarizing the different types of anarchists right alongside the Anarchism article summarizing the same thing. --dk----A person who professes a belief in anarchy or Anarchism. Because anyone can claim to be an anarchist, there is no central authority on what it means to be an anarchist. Although the term anarchist generally means an opposition to all forms of governments, anarchists extend this concept to include quite a number of institutions.*The most well-known kind of anarchists, which is often what is referred to by the name "anarchist", is socialist anarchists, who claim that private property and anarchism are incompatible and that capitalism is inherently dependent upon the existence of a state.*A lesser-known kind of anarchists is the anarcho-capitalists who favor capitalism; they are part of the classical liberal tradition (see libertarianism) instead of socialist anarchist tradition, and are not considered as anarchists by socialist anarchists.*individualist anarchists are a brand of their own, more involved in personal freedom than on social organization.See Anarchism for more details on the different flavors of anarchists and the sometimes hostile relationship between them.Calling someone an "anarchist" has been a popular way for TV commentators and newspaper writers to demonize and de-legitimize non-mainstream viewpoints.Historical Anarchist movements:*Spanish Civil War - During the Spanish civil war the anti-fascists forces were comprised of various factions including at least the communists and anarchists. Anarchist groups did in fact control terrirtory and factories for a time during that war. Fights broke out between the communists and anarchist in some cities. One of the Anarchist groups from that time, the CNT (Confederation National de Trabajos) still exists in Spain and has a website.Well-known Anarchists of each different flavor:*Michael Bakunin (1814 - 1876), well-known early socialist anarchist*Gustave de Molinari (1819 - 1912), first theorist of anarcho-capitalism*Benjamin Tucker (1854 - 1939), great defender of individualist anarchismOther anarchists:*Voltairine de Cleyre (1866 - 1912)*Emma Goldman (1869-1940)*Rudolph Rocker (1873 - 1958)Quotes:: "When compared with the suppression of anarchy every other question sinks into insignificance. The anarchist is the enemy of humanity, the enemy of all mankind, and his is a deeper degree of criminality than any other. No immigrant is allowed to come to our shores if he is an anarchist; and no paper published here or abroad should be permitted circulation in this country if it propagates anarchist opinions." -President Theodore Roosevelt:I was attracted to anarchism as a young teenager, as soon as I began to think about the world beyond a pretty narrow range, and haven't seen much reason to revise those early attitudes since. I think it only makes sense to seek out and identify structures of authority, hierarchy, and domination in every aspect of life, and to challenge them; unless a justification for them can be given, they are illegitimate, and should be dismantled, to increase the scope of human freedom. Noam Chomsky, May 1995talk:Anarchist|/Talk----It looks like this has come up before (albeit some time ago), but why do we need this page ''and'' one at anarchism? It seems that when it came up before (see above), somebody was concerned about mixing up what you might call "legitimate" anarchism and people simply attacking others as "anarchists", but I think this is covered in the main anarchism article anyway (under the section "Anarchism as Anomie").If there are no objections, I'm going to integrate what's here into anarchism and make this page a redirect (or, of course, somebody else can do it). I'll leave it a few days in case there are strong views. --Camembert:Well, it's been weeks, and no voice of dissent. I've redirected it. --CamembertdisambI've change this page to a disamb page because I thought the "Marvel Comics" disamb notice on the top of Anarchism looked very out of place. -- User:Infinity0|infinity'''User_talk:Infinity0|0''' 19:47, 7 July 2007 (UTC)