CapitalDiscussionto do with individual creativity andThen the money supply and usury cranks will go at financial_capital...Rather than make assumptions, though, we might be better off just emailing some of these people whose definitions are referenced (Hawken, Harding, Hubley, Putnam, etc.) and seeing if they want to take a stab at this stuff.Before the cranks show up.------Most recent rewrite helps - putting economics last makes more historical sense.I'm wondering about " imitative, creative, and social " components - this I understand as only applying to "human capital", i.e. "instructional, individual and social" is a breakdown of humancapital that doesn't seem to apply to natural, infrastructural or financial forms - unless we want to include "creative accounting" and "imitative infrastructure " (biomimicry)?Now that I think about it, it makese some sense, especially w.r.t. Lev and his "brand name capital"....Am I wrong in assuming imitative=instructional, creative=individual?  Maybe I assumed too much there...------Dear English speaking People! There are different translations for the word ''capital'' in many languages according to the meaning. For example in Polish language the word ''Capital'' does not have a meaning related to the city (political capital). There should be a disambiguation page for interwiki links to work!Dear person, this article is ''about'' the english meaning. This is, after all ''english'' wiki. What other words are used in other languages can be dealt with on other language wikis, not here. User:Jtdirl|ÉÍREmanTo clarify - our Polish friend was talking about an earlier version of the article which had several sections - one about capitals of countries, one about capital in economics, etc.  He was making the valid point that this style of article makes interlanguage linking difficult -  in Polish the same word isn't used for capitals of countries and capital in economics.  So a proper disambiguation page was called for, which has since been created. Enchanter 23:03 Apr 25, 2003 (UTC)good disambigulation page. User:Jtdirl|ÉÍREman 23:10 Apr 25, 2003 (UTC)----whats the intention behind Docu's recent edit (8 Oct) ? The other language links have been moved from the top to the bottom. If this is part of some convention then its ok.Also why has the meaningful disambiguation line been replaced by "Alternate uses". i feel the earlier line made more sense. Jay 09:23, 8 Oct 2003 (UTC)British termWhich spelling is used for the British slang -- capital or capitol? Forgive my ignorance. User:Scarecroe|—scarecroe (talk) 16:11, 29 January 2008 (UTC): You mean, as in ''That is a capital idea!'' ...? (Found it in wiktionary) --Paul Erik;/font; (talk);/font;Special:Contributions/Paul Erik|(contribs);/font;;02:59, 10 February 2008 (UTC)