Sharing the benefits of biodiversity with developing nationsYour article simply ignores the discussion on biopiracy and the fact that the Convention calls for the sharing of the results of research and development of products that derive from communities that bare the traditional knowledge of the use of this biodiversity. Pharmaceutic companies are supposed to pay for the use of indigenous knowledge, an area in which developed nations fail to meet their commitments with the Convention. These commitments are made clear in articles 15 and 19 of the Convention:Article 15. Access to Genetic Resources1. Recognizing the sovereign rights of States over their natural resources, the authority to determine access to genetic resources rests with the national governments and is subject to national legislation.(...)7. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, and in accordance with Articles 16 and 19 and, where necessary, through the financial mechanism established by Articles 20 and 21 with the aim of '''sharing in a fair and equitable way the results of research and development and the benefits arising from the commercial and other utilization of genetic resources''' with the Contracting Party providing such resources. Such sharing shall be upon mutually agreed terms.Article 19. Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits1. Each Contracting Party shall take legislative, administrative or policy measures, as appropriate, to provide for the effective participation in biotechnological research activities by those Contracting Parties, especially developing countries, which provide the genetic resources for such research, and where feasible in such Contracting Parties.-- André BuenoList of Parties ==The actual list of Parties needs to be updated. The official list is available on the at (Written by 69.90.183.226 previously, unsigned):I removed Andorra and Somalia (and for the time being Iraq) from the list of parties, as per both and the source you posted. According to the page's edit history, someone added those because of a CIA factbook link. Can we get that source linked, and which source should be trusted? I would assume treaties.un.org would be the first source to go to in this case. That one mostly agrees with my cbd.int link, but the dates differ a little, probably because they measure slightly different things, like one lists dates of ratification and one when they turn into effect or something. Lejman (talk) 21:30, 22 September 2009 (UTC)RedirectAgain a strange redirect. What is the definition of biodiversity/biological diversity? What threatens it? Who or what benefits from it? Are all theese redirect pages stubs for something more ambitious? --Anders TörlindThe redirect is there because of the abbreviation listed on the page of the agreement. If someone wants to write about "biodiversity", the redirect should of course be changed to a link on the page. I did it that way from the start on Whaling. The same goes for Marine Dumping. Note that if someone wants to write about that as a concept, they should use Marine dumping. The reason I want the redirects in the first place is that the CIA World Factbook uses them on its country pages, and I make them links when I get there. Using the long names there would be a pain. --PinkunicornAwlrighty! I figured there was something going on there :-) Too bad i can only supply the questions on the subjects...Oh, well, one can't know everything.I think. --Anders TörlindNagoya ProtocolWhen the press release is removed, what is remaining in Nagoya Protocol should probably be merged here.  Unless some details ''not'' in the press release are provided, it's just an adjunct to the Convention.  — Arthur Rubin  (talk) 10:56, 23 March 2011 (UTC):Close request; Nagoya Protocol was deleted as a copyright violation.  — Arthur Rubin  (talk) 02:58, 25 March 2011 (UTC)::A new wp article might be created and be allowed to maintain if it doesn't plagiarize.   Special:Contributions/99.181.155.158|99.181.155.158 (talk) 04:41, 22 April 2011 (UTC):::It still should likely be a section of this article, but we can discuss that when/if it's created, either as a separate article, or as a section here.  — Arthur Rubin  (talk) 08:21, 22 April 2011 (UTC)::::What are the interlinkages between convention on biodiversity and Food And Agricultural Organization(FAO) Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture?I could find just that the Nagoya protocol that is a part of CBD does not cover resources covered by the FAO treaty on Plant Genetic Resources Kartikay021 (talk) 03:18, 5 June 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 4 external links on Convention on Biological Diversity. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive to *Added archive *Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;08:24, 27 February 2016 (UTC)