New linkI propose this new link: [Title 9, ''"Arbitration,"'' of the United States Code].  Canon Law Junkie ;/font;§§§ Talk;/font; 14:46, 5 February 2011 (UTC)I propose another arbitration organization link: [''"United States Arbitration Association"''].  On virtually every wiki arbitration article, there are links to American Arbitration Association, and little mention of other industry choices.  There are several other national organizations that should also be represented.UntitledI think we tried to change this at the same time.  Sorry.  :(Oh, I thought you had just overlooked it!  Sorry! --LMSGlad you seem to have lots of patience! : ) F. Lee HornArbitration Outside the United StatesThis article exclusively deals with legal arbitration in the United States, completely missing the fact that countless other nations have such a system. It goes into great detail about the nuances of American legal arbitration, but barely even mentions;/i; its use in other countries. Now that's not very encyclopedic...:Well, it's up to the lawyers in those countries to research their law and summarize it on Wikipedia, if any of them have the energy, inclination, or time.  I suppose an American law student with free LexisNexis access could look up a huge amount of Commonwealth arbitration law through Lexis.  Unfortunately, I already graduated, so I'm no longer in that category. --Coolcaesar 02:48, 23 September 2005 (UTC)::A lot of the article, including the large section on arbitration in the US, would actually apply equally to English law and many Commonwealth jurisdictions, but it becomes a mammoth task to edit it once there is detailed reference to US statutes and practice, rather than general principles. With any legal topic there is an issue about how Wikipedia covers the law of 200+ jurisdictions in the world. Contributors are unlikely to know the law in all of them but we can be aware that each other exist and try to be as general as possible, or to state explicitly the jurisdiction we are talking about - for example common law jurisdictions. Chris R 07:47, 21 January 2006 (UTC):: International Arbitration is, financially, probably more important than all domestic arbitrations put together. Completing the article on this subject should be the priority...:::Yeah, but comprehensive resources on international arbitration are the kind of thing that's available only on LexisNexis (which is very expensive) or at a very small number of elite law libraries (which are hard to gain physical access to).  Again, if you really care about it that much, the burden is on you to research it.  --Coolcaesar 01:55, 7 October 2005 (UTC)::: First, note that the two subjects are not separate -- international arbitration is practiced in national contexts.  Here its practice is discussed with regard to the U.S. contexts.  The goal should I think be to add more contexts to make it less U.S.-specific, not to remove the national dimension: that would be impossible.::: Second, though, this isn't really a Lexis-Nexis-exclusive thing.  Kluwer is the big int'l commercial arb. publisher so, for instance, will get most of what one wants here.  Still, that doesn't get it done, and I don't have time either right now ... agreed that it would be nice to do, though.  Maybe when less busy. AnotherBDA 10:10, 27 November 2005 (UTC)Article removed from Wikipedia:Good articlesThis article was formerly listed as a good article, but was removed from the listing because the article is extremely US-centric at the moment, and the lead should be expanded to give more of an idea of what the article is about, because it's quite vague at the moment. Worldtraveller 00:33, 24 February 2006 (UTC):It would do a lot of violence to the article to expand it to refer to arbitration internationally (which would have to include not only arbitration in other countries, but also public international law arbitration of the sort the Permanent Court of Arbitration does).  It seems to me that the best way forward would be to simply move this article to Arbitration in the United States, and place a stub at Arbitration as a filler.  US Arbitration is what this article is about, anyway, so the move would arguably only have the effect of giving the article a title that better describes its contents. Plus because this article is at the moment actually very good, it makes folks a bit reluctant to leap in and change it to include arbitration in other jurisdictions, so the move is likely to improve the quality of the article's contents.  I'll wait a few days, and if no-one has major problems with it, I'll go ahead and make the change.  -- Arvind 21:46, 28 July 2006 (UTC)Looking for a reference for the followingHi all.  Saw this in the article "Arbitrators are not bound by precedent".  I was wondering if anyone can point me towards something that says this is the case, preferably in the UK --203.59.112.98 16:41, 22 June 2006 (UTC)::The comment might be slightly overstated.  In most countries arbitrators have a huge amount of discretion in relation to conduct and procedure (in the UK, see section 34 of the Arbitration Act 1996), and the fact that a similarly constituted tribunal or another tribunal has (for example) ruled certain evidence inadmissible, or provided that a certain type of evidence could only be given by a single agreed expert, does not bind any future tribunal as to how they conduct their hearings (even hearings between the same parties).::But it would not be correct to say that arbitration tribunals are not bound by legal precedents and judicial decisions - they still need to follow the law in the making of their awards - they can't just determine cases by their own unique sense of fairness!  If they did, then they would leave the award open to an appeal on a point of law (in the UK, see section 69 of the AA96). Legis 17:20, 22 June 2006 (UTC):: I agree with Legis.  Arbitrators are bound by legal precedent.  This is my first visit to this page, and on first read I thought that the article gave the impression that arbitration was almost a type of ADR.  In the UK it certainly isn't, and many arbitrations are far more formal than the Courts - a cynic might say that arbitrators who are scared of challenges to the courts, together with lawyers on hourly rates have no reason to cut through procedure like the judges are doing.  There is no real focus on of the international chambers - such as the ICC, UNCITRAL etc - which is a must have in an article such as this.  Have no time now but hope to be back!   --BramleyBarn 15:30, 29 July 2006 (UTC)::: That's because this article as it stands covers only US arbitration, which is an entirely different animal, what with their non-neutral arbitrators and all.  In my opinion, we should simply move this article to Arbitration in the United States and start from scratch on an article that covers arbitration more generally, including its various types (public international law arbitration, international commercial arbitration, etc.), its history, its legal framework, and so on.  Also, I assume you were talking loosely, but UNCITRAL isn't an arbitral institution or arbitral chamber. -- Arvind 15:55, 29 July 2006 (UTC)::::You're right - my sloppiness!  Both are 'rules' of arbitration that can be applied to ad-hoc arbitrations, but only ICC is an organisation that enforces its rules, appoints arbitrators etc.   --BramleyBarn 17:00, 29 July 2006 (UTC)::::Well, in the United States, arbitration law is taught in alternative dispute resolution courses.  Also, many (if not most) American arbitrations are less formal than the courts, in that the arbitrator wears a business suit like the lawyers, and sits at a conference table rather than on a raised platform, and is not bound by all the complexity of court rules.  Although it's true that some of our arbitration systems are notorious for being non-neutral (the American Arbitration Association comes to mind), we do have some arbitration systems like JAMS (formerly known as the Judicial Arbitration and Mediation Service) which have a strong reputation for neutrality. But I agree that with such a strong difference in the meaning of the term "arbitration," perhaps the article needs to be split.--Coolcaesar 16:27, 29 July 2006 (UTC)::Getting back to the original question (as far as U.S. law is concerned):  It depends, to an extent, what you mean by precedent.  The U.S. Supreme Court held in W. R. Grace ; Co. v. Local 759, International Union of Rubber Workers, 461 U.S. 757 (1983), that a labor arbitrator was not necessarily bound by prior decisions of other arbitrators interpreting the same contract language under the same collective bargaining agreement; as the court put it, the scope of the arbitrator's authority and the precedential value of arbitration decisions are issues of contract interpretation for the arbitrator to decide. If the parties were to specifically incorporate an arbitrator's decision in a subsequent agreement that might make it binding, but otherwise it is fair game in any subsequent arbitration. As a practical matter, however, many arbitrators will give great weight to an earlier arbitrator's decision, even one they think is wrong.::As for following precedents in the sense of following either statutes or court or agency decisions, the law is less clear. California, for example, will not overturn an award even for manifest errors of law.  While it may be possible to overturn an award if it contravenes public policy, in the field of labor arbitration the U.S. Supreme Court has held that the conflict must be direct and the public policy must be "well-defined and dominant," i.e., spelled out with some specificity in the statute, rather than the court's own view of what public policy should be.  United Paperworkers International Union v. Misco, Inc., 484 U.S. 29 (1987) (state and federal laws criminalizing use of marijuana did not bar reinstatement of worker who used marijuana); Eastern Associated Coal Corp. v. Mine Workers District 17, 531 U.S. 57 (2000) (federal statute requiring drug testing of truck drivers did not bar reinstatement of driver who failed test).::In addition, to the extent that the arbitrator is interpreting a contract, rather than ruling on a claim governed by statutory or common  law, the role of external law is debatable:  some arbitrators believe that they have no obligation to look beyond the contract in deciding the issue submitted to them unless the parties expressly authorize them to do so.::Finally, I agree that this article is highly US-centric and should be renamed or moved.  Italo Svevo 19:58, 10 September 2006 (UTC)Is there a certain am't of time that an arbitrator has before rendering a decision?We have been waiting since Nov 05 for the Arbitrators decision, of which he said would be within a few weeks.  Our Laywer is not answering our calls and we would like to find out if the decision was made and if not yet then is there a limited amount of time that the Arbitrator has before rendering a decision.  Would think that there must be a mximum am't of time he has to make the decision?:Depends on the rules that were specified in the original arbitration clause or on the rules supplied by the arbitration service that provided the arbitrator.  If there's nothing compelling the arbitrator to file a decision in a reasonable amount of time, you're probably in big trouble.  --Coolcaesar 01:06, 10 September 2006 (UTC)::But for future reference, you should not use Wikipedia talk pages as a means of requesting free legal advice. Legis 09:45, 10 September 2006 (UTC)Move and stubSince everyone seemed to agree that the article should be moved to Arbitration in the United States of America, I decided to go ahead and do that.  I've placed a stub here for now, which it would be great if we could work on from a more international perspective. -- Arvind 10:12, 13 September 2006 (UTC)Adhesion contracts are not exempt from arbitrationI deleted the sentence that said that the Uniform Arbitration Act exempts insurance and adhesion contracts, because the UAA says no such thing.   is the citation that was provided, and, the section that the deleted sentence appears to be referring to seems to imply that the article is directly quoting, word for word, from the exact text of the Uniform Arbitration Act.  However, as I look [here], this alleged quote is nowhere to be found in the entire statute.  Furthermore, look at the two sources.  Once is some website called forc.org.  That is not a ''reliable'' source, at all.  What are this website's credentials, and why should we give two pieces of crap about them?  However, the exact text of the Uniform Arbitration Act that I provided is from the website of the University of Pennsylvania.  That is a much more reliable source than "forc.org."  Honestly, are we going to start citing spoon.org next?  What about chopsticks.org?Wikieditor1988 (talk) 02:45, 5 February 2011 (UTC)Copyright problem removedPrior content in this article duplicated one or more previously published sources. The material was copied from: Infringing material has been rewritten or removed and must not be restored, ''unless'' it is duly released under a compatible license. (For more information, please see "using copyrighted works from others" if you are not the copyright holder of this material, or "donating copyrighted materials" if you are.) For legal reasons, we cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or published material; such additions will be deleted. Contributors may use copyrighted publications as a source of ''information'', but not as a source of ''sentences'' or ''phrases''. Accordingly, the material ''may'' be rewritten, but only if it does not infringe on the copyright of the original ''or'' plagiarize from that source. Please see our guideline on non-free text for how to properly implement limited quotations of copyrighted text. Wikipedia takes copyright violations very seriously, and persistent violators '''will''' be blocked from editing. While we appreciate contributions, we must require all contributors to understand and comply with these policies. Thank you. ;; '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''';/font; 04:32, 2 October 2011 (UTC)NPOV Problems/Recent Supreme Court decisionsThis article is really in need of attention from an expert. Some parts read like an anti-arbitration polemic; others are outdated in light of recent US Supreme Court decisions confirming the strong presumption in favor of upholding an agreement to arbitrate.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/86.24.83.108|86.24.83.108 (talk) 16:39, 28 July 2012 (UTC);; ;;:I am removing the tag because no discussion followed. Thincat (talk) 23:32, 18 September 2013 (UTC)Timeliness and the Non-Existence of Arbitration AgreementsUser:Elvey   of the section "Timeliness and the Non-Existence of Arbitration Agreements".  The entire section relies on legal cases, which are primary sources.  In violation of WP:PRIMARY, which states "Any interpretation of primary source material requires a reliable secondary source for that interpretation," the section contains numerous examples of original legal research interpreting the cases cited, such as*"Texas is particularly consumer-unfriendly in this respect.  In that state, not only does the time limit apply, no matter on what grounds you dispute the award, but even if you are within the three month time limit, '[t]he nonexistence of an arbitration agreement is not one of the grounds upon which an arbitration award may be vacated under the FAA,' effectively allowing anyone in Texas to unilaterally file arbitrations against anyone else, contract or no contract, and the other party who did not want to arbitrate is left without recourse." (citation omitted)*"Missouri takes a slightly more consumer-friendly approach, but still largely favors proponents of arbitration."*"However, neither of these cases [from the First Circuit] specify whether or not the opponent to the arbitration has the burden of proof, like in Missouri."The section is entirely unencyclopedic.  In addition, the devotion of three paragraphs of the article to time limits for vacating arbitration awards is WP:UNDUE weight.  Further, without a secondary source discussing the effects of various cases concerning the timeliness of a motion to vacate, it is doubtful that WP:NPOV is satisfied.  I plan to remove the section as it appears in the article now (without prejudice to reinsertion upon sufficient improvement).  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 17:23, 5 April 2015 (UTC):The more basic problem is that this whole article treats arbitration (no matter the source, the subject, the jurisdiction) as fungible goods.  Labor arbitration is not the same as consumer arbitration.  The article is severely flawed.  There is nothing wrong with reporting this state-by-state, but it has to be sorted out with an explanation. User:7;amp;6=thirteen|7;amp;6=thirteen;/b; (User talk:7;amp;6=thirteen|☎;/b;) 22:36, 5 April 2015 (UTC)::Concur with both of you. --Coolcaesar (talk) 05:12, 6 April 2015 (UTC):::As I said, I don't think this is OR as defined at WP:OR. Here's what I mean, in more detail: Reporting what reliable primary sources say and interpreting what they say are two different things.  The latter is not allowed.  The former is allowed.  The section is indeed in need of work.  Deleting it entirely is '''not constructive''', however.  User 7;6 says "There is nothing wrong with reporting this state-by-state"; Coolcaesar concurs.  I would welcome edits that shift the text of "Timeliness and the Non-Existence of Arbitration Agreements" toward "explanation" and away from "interpretation", and/or shorten (but do not remove) it, per WP:UNDUE.  Be bold.--Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 17:46, 6 April 2015 (UTC)::::I concur that it should be and probably can be fixed if restated as a more balanced treatment, but the burden is on ''you'' and you alone as the editor pushing that text to rewrite it and get some proper sources so it complies with Wikipedia core content policies and doesn't look like an egregious violation of WP:NOR, WP:NPOV, WP:V, etc.  It's not anyone else's problem.  Like the few other lawyers who bother to edit Wikipedia, I have more important priorities like fixing Law of the United States and Insurance policy.  Fix it, or it goes.  --Coolcaesar (talk) 07:11, 8 April 2015 (UTC):::::No.  I'm not "the editor pushing" the text.  I didn't originate it.  Get your facts straight, mister.  I'm defending it.  Please chill out and don't throw things like "WP:NOR, WP:NPOV, WP:V, etc" with no explanation as if they're loaded weapons; they're blanks.   You should know better.  I said, Deleting it entirely is '''not constructive'''.   Please respond to that.   I said, Reporting what reliable primary sources say is allowed.  Please respond to that.  --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 19:30, 8 April 2015 (UTC)Dear Editors:Chill.  Let's try to come up with a strategy that fixes the problem, instead of fixing the blame.  Discuss the article, not each other.  Please, in the name of Jimbo.  May Wikipedia be praised. User:7;amp;6=thirteen|7;amp;6=thirteen;/b; (User talk:7;amp;6=thirteen|☎;/b;) 19:42, 8 April 2015 (UTC)Citation and fact removal - Arbitration Agreements do get ruled unconscionableValid citations should not be removed when it leaves a sentence/section with no valid citations, as RJaguar3 did . Fixed.  An unfortunate (inadvertent?) interim result was that the article was then whitewashed of the well-cited fact that Arbitration Agreements do get ruled unconscionable.  --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 18:05, 6 April 2015 (UTC):Elvey In the cases referred to, the arbitration agreements were not enforced, but '''not''' on grounds of unconscionability (''Douglas'' did discuss the district court's analysis of unconscionability under pre-''Concepcion'' law in dicta as an alternative basis for its decision to compel arbitration being clearly erroneous).  In ''Douglas v. United States District Court'', the plaintiff entered into a contract with AOL which was then sold to Talk America.  Talk America introduced an arbitration clause by posting on a webpage that plaintiff never saw.  The Ninth Circuit held that plaintiff never received actual or constructive notice of the revised terms and therefore could not agree to be bound by them.    In ''Harris v. Blockbuster Inc.'', the court found that defendant's contract, in which it reserved the right to unilaterally make changes that would be effective upon posting to the website, was illusory, and therefore, the contract, including the arbitration clause, could not be enforced.    I do think that coverage of unconscionability as applied to arbitration agreements is necessary for this article, but it should rely primarily on secondary sources (see Consumer arbitration#Unconscionability as a defense for an example of how it might be written).  I also think that the misinterpretation of ''Douglas'' and ''Harris'' exemplifies why original research based on primary source cases does not comport with Wikipedia's policies, including WP:V and WP:NOR, and is therefore inappropriate for this article.  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 01:56, 10 April 2015 (UTC)::No. Yes, "The Ninth Circuit held that plaintiff never received actual or constructive notice of the revised terms and therefore could not agree to be bound by them"... and because of that, found them unconscionable.  It's clear in a plain reading of the decision.    Swap in secondary sources if you like; they are preferred. --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 21:53, 10 April 2015 (UTC)::In any case, is it clear that valid citations should not be removed as you did? --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 21:53, 10 April 2015 (UTC):::Elvey When I removed the ''Douglas'' and ''Harris'' citations, I was under the impression (as emphasized by Eric Goldman's [coverage] [of] [the cases]) that the cases dealt with contract formation, not unconscionability.  My research in writing the talk page comment showed that I was at least partially wrong with respect to ''Douglas'' (I checked ''Harris'' again and it doesn't mention unconscionability).  I still think it's probably better to rewrite the unconscionability section from scratch using secondary sources, as I alluded to the section I wrote for the consumer arbitration article.  A section based on secondary sources relies on published interpretations of cases, as opposed to Wikipedia editors' interpretation, and also is more likely to satisfy WP:NPOV.  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 15:40, 11 April 2015 (UTC):::'''EDIT''', also the ''Douglas'' court [found] that Douglas's lack of actual or constructive notice, in and of itself, meant that Douglas could not accept the amendments and the amendments were therefore unenforceable: "The district court thus erred in holding that Douglas was bound by the terms of the revised contract when he was not notified of the changes. The error reflects fundamental misapplications of contract law and goes to the heart of petitioner’s claim. It would alone be sufficient to satisfy the third Bauman;/u; factor..."  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 15:43, 11 April 2015 (UTC)::::The Douglas court found that "...the new [arbitration] terms probably would not be enforceable in California because they conflict with California's fundamental policy as to '''unconscionable''' contracts."   I already said, "Swap in secondary sources if you like; they are preferred."  In the meantime, I think it's OK to remove the Harris citation. --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 14:51, 14 April 2015 (UTC):::::I concur with RJaguar3's reading of ''Douglas''.  Elvey is clearly confusing the holding of ''Douglas'' with dicta and needs to work on mastering the art of close reading.  The court's holding is that the revision to the contract is unenforceable for lack of adequate notice of the revised terms; the court marks that as its holding by saying that alone is sufficient to satisfy the third ''Bauman'' factor. The court then marks its subsequent discussion of unconscionability as a hypothetical (meaning it is obiter dicta) with the transition word "probably" and again with the adjective "assuming" (in the later parenthetical).  Thus, it is difficult to see how one could argue in good faith that ''Douglas'' directly supports the proposition that "Arbitration clauses of companies such as Blockbuster, AT;T, and Talk America have been ruled unconscionable and, therefore, unenforceable."  --Coolcaesar (talk) 05:48, 16 April 2015 (UTC)I've edited the article accordingly. Whoever originally added the  ''Douglas'' and ''Harris'' citations may have been right to add them, but they don't support the current text, so I removed them.  I get that holdings and dicta are not the same and that technically the unconscionability issue wasn't reached; that's why I quoted the ruling and have now edited accordingly.  I do think that   ''Douglas'' clearly supports the contention that the court stated that AOL/Talk America's "[arbitration] terms probably would not be enforceable in California because they conflict with California's fundamental policy as to '''unconscionable''' contracts."  Agreed?  Thanks for talking this through.  At least now the article hasn't been whitewashed of the fact that Arbitration Agreements do get ruled unconscionable.--Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 20:02, 17 April 2015 (UTC):The problem is that you are viewing the issue as if such agreements could ''still'' be ruled unenforceable on the basis of unconscionability. While that was true in the past, after ''Concepcion'', it's much more rare that such rulings will be upheld on appeal.  The article needs to be adjusted to make it clearer that (1) here is what was true in the past (i.e., they have been ruled unconscionable under state law), (2) ''but'', the Supreme Court clamped down hard in ''Concepcion'' and now all those old rulings are probably no longer valid (to the extent preempted by federal law). --Coolcaesar (talk) 01:20, 27 April 2015 (UTC)Applebee's "source"The text "(See Applebee's)" appeared as a source for the statement "However arbitration clauses have been upheld repeatedly as well."  I removed it because it is unclear what reliable source (if any) is being referred to.  I speculate it may have something to do with the text in the paragraph in the Applebee's article  a year and a half ago.  Regardless, there should certainly be a much better source for this (to the extent that the statement needs a source as a statement likely to be challenged post-''Concepcion'').  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 05:40, 20 April 2015 (UTC)AAA Yearbook and In re Checking Account Overdraft Litigationa source that appeared to be used to cite several banks' arbitration clauses as being ruled unconscionable.  The source referred to the District Court's September 2011 decision in ''In re Checking Account Overdraft Litigation''.  Appeals were taken from the decisions, and several of the cases were reversed.  ''Buffington v. SunTrust'' was reversed in a March 2012 unpublished opinion by the 11th circuit, which held a loser-pays fee-shifting provision and a set-off provision that could applied to enforce an arbitration award in favor of the bank were not unconscionable under Georgia law.  ''Powell-Perry v. Branch Banking ; Trust Co.'' was also reversed in a July 2012 unpublished opinion which held a fee-shifting provision was unconscionable under North Carolina law but severable, and a set-off provision was not unconscionable because North Carolina law explicitly authorized set-off.  In Barras v. Branch Banking ; Trust, the 11th circuit in a July 2012 published opinion held that a clause requiring a bank customer to pay the bank's attorney's fees in a legal dispute, regardless of the outcome, was unconscionable, but that provision was severable from the arbitration clause.  In ''Given v. M;T Bank'', the district court found that the claims brought by the plaintiff were excluded from the scope of the arbitration clause and therefore declined to address unconscionability.  The 11th circuit reversed, holding that the arbitration agreement required an arbitrator, not a court, to determine whether the plaintiff's claims were within the scope of the arbitration clause.  In ''Hough v. Regions Financial'', the 11th circuit, in a March 2012 published opinion, held that a one-way loser-pays fee-shifting clause in favor of the bank was not unconscionable under Georgia law.  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 06:01, 20 April 2015 (UTC):Yes, I see that in ''Hough v. Regions Financial'', the 11th circuit held that a clause was not unconscionable under Georgia law because   Likewise in ''SunTrust''. So perhaps we need to say that unconsionability of arbitration clauses is defined on a state-by-state basis. Do you have any evidence that the cases against  U.S. Bank, Bank of America , or Citibank were reversed?  If not, I think the claims and source remain verifiable and valid, respectively. See, e.g. ...  --Elvey(t•Special:Contribs/Elvey|c) 00:34, 21 April 2015 (UTC):: The actual text of the case [is here]. There do not appear to be any rulings against U.S. Bank, BofA, or Citibank in that opinion. The court ''never'' actually ruled against those defendants on arbitration issues. Which means the case does not support the assertion for which it is cited.  --Coolcaesar (talk) 01:13, 27 April 2015 (UTC)Unconscionability of AT;T's clauseUser:Elvey reintroduced AT;T as a company whose clause was ruled unconscionable.  The cited source (Huffington Post) does not list the AT;T clause as having been unconscionable; it serves only as a source that the clause in ''Chavarria v. Ralphs Grocer Co.'' was unconscionable.  Additionally, the inclusion of AT;T in the list is highly misleading.  Although clauses of AT;T's predecessors were found unconscionable in several cases (''Ting v. AT;T'' (9th Cir. 2003), ''Kinkel v. Cingular Wireless'' (Ill. 2006), ''T-Mobile USA v. Laster'' (cert. denied 2008, Andrew Pincus took the unusual step of filing a brief opposing certiorari because he said that a fairer arbitration clause would make a better vehicle)), AT;T Mobility's clause was upheld by the Supreme Court in ''Concepcion'', and secondary sources (including ) have characterized the clause as being exceptionally consumer-friendly.  '''RJaguar3 ;#124; u ;#124; t''' 03:16, 22 April 2015 (UTC):Concur. ''Concepcion'' is on point. AT;T and predecessors may have had losses in the past, but it's clear from ''Concepcion'' that they're learning from their mistakes. --Coolcaesar (talk) 01:06, 27 April 2015 (UTC)