et la cornemuse ? (''and the French bagpipe?''Il est remarquable que cet article parvienne à ne parler de la France qu'une seule fois et seulement de la musette de cour lorsque le même article en français évoque dix-huit autres instruments !  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/121.74.158.60|121.74.158.60 (talk) 06:39, 11 May 2012 (UTC);; ;;:''Summary: it's odd that the article doesn't talk much about France and its many pipes, mentioning only the musette de cour. The equivalent article in French mentions 18 kinds of French pipes'':You raise an interesting point, and the answer would include:*On an English-language page, there's a natural bias towards pipes familiar to English-language speakers*Most of the mentions of specific pipes on the page are about technical details (drone, chanter, reeds, etc). Since in most of those cases French pipes have the same features as other pipes, it isn't necessary to single the French pipes out since an Irish uilleann is a somewhat more familiar example of "bellows" than most French pipes would be to an English speaker.*In the "History" section, we don't happen to cover well the main historical issues where France would be prominent. Off the top of my head, significant historical aspects of French piping would include popularising bellows (that's French, yes?) and also the fashion for aristocrats playing bagpipes as a "pastoral" hipster statement, pretending to be "rustic" and all. Some ''brief'' proportional mention of either of those would be a way to mention France and also fill in a few gaps in the narrative. MatthewVanitas (talk) 16:55, 7 August 2012 (UTC)Greek bagpipe:el:Γκάινταplease check out this page of greek gaida(macedonia and thrace) ''γκάιντα'' and tsampouna ''τσαμπούνα'' in greek islands so it could be written together with the other bagpipes.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/79.129.63.49|79.129.63.49 (talk) 14:15, 18 May 2013 (UTC);; ;;:Hello, is the material you're referring to not properly covered at these:*Tsampouna, a double-chantered, droneless bagpipe played mostly in the Greek Island*Askomandoura, a Cretan bagpipe similar to the tsampouna*Dankiyo, a bagpipe played in the historically ethnic Greek regions of Trabzon and Rize in what is now Turkey*Gaida, a type of bagpipe played in northern Greece as well as parts of Macedonia and the Balkans:To help anyone looking for Greek bagpipes, I've made a disambiguation page to connect them all: Greek bagpipes.:MatthewVanitas (talk) 17:51, 18 May 2013 (UTC)Generalities that make for false statments"especially among fire department, military and police forces in the United Kingdom". Not in most of England or Wales. Bagpipes are less common in Wales (Music of Wales) than male voice choirs are in Scotland (Music of Scotland)! -- PBS (talk)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Bagpipes. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;07:42, 27 February 2016 (UTC)