Side EffectsWhat does Severe Tounge and Severe Teeth mean as a side effect?  Either this needs to be reworded, removed, corrected. --67.189.4.167 02:33, 17 May 2005 (UTC)Other:Doesnt smoking ritalin and dexadrine make you impotent??? (most common method).Here (Europe) smoking isn't at all common, and snorting is usual. --TawIn eastern Europe the most usual is injecting Methamphetamine. -- DA:First marketed in 1932 by the U.S. Army Air Corps in Britain during World War II.There was no World War II in 1932.----I find it VERY problematic to speak about "positive", "neutral" and "negative" effects of anything (not only of a drug). This is NOT OBJECTIVE, not from the neutral point-of-view, as Wikipedia should be.I think, it would be good to agree on some common scheme to describe drugs, which could include (please improve and move to a better location - under Drug or even Pharmacology ?):HistoryChemistry(ev. Biology)Pharmacology (effects and mechanisms of action, including dangers due to behavioral change (as traffic accidents,aggressive beh. etc.))Toxicology (harmful effects by the drug itself)Accepted medical applicationsSociology - including all the non-medical apps. (common use in different socienties - of course, the medical apps. are a part of this also)Law (globally)-- DAIn my experience, taking small doses of dextroamphetamine for adhd resulted in a considerable loss of appetite, and I believe this is common, contrary to the "Neutral effects" section.----Is "speed" the same as amphetamine proper, or does it describe all amphetamines? What other amphetamines are there? AxelBoldt 15:32, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC):In the United States, I believe speed generally refers to methamphetamine.  ElBenevolente 18:50, 7 Oct 2004 (UTC)In accordance with Wikipedia:WikiProject_Drugs naming policy, I propose we move this page to the INN amfetamine. If you have any concern with this proposal, please discuss it on Wikipedia:WikiProject Drugs/General/Naming of drug pages|this page. Matt 18:09, 23 Dec 2004 (UTC)Only one objection.  This page was already at its INN, ''amphetamine''. You have moved it to a US name instead of its International Nonproprietary one. I propose that it is moved back in accordance with the Wikipedia:WikiProject_Drugs naming policy. -- Derek Ross |  Talk 16:24, 2004 Dec 30 (UTC)I got rid of several question marks.  Under the cardiovascular, respiratory and eye sections on the right data table, i put bronchodilator and mydriasis.  If this is not sufficient, please remove it.  I think they are appropriate though.  Personally, i think it is hard to make something like amphetamine, a moderately-severely addictive drug into an unbiased wikipedia page.  But it seems to be doing well so far.This sentence doesn't make sense:"First marketed in 1932 by the U.S. Army Air Corps in Britain during World War II."layoutThe layout looks awful, can someone do something about this?  Night Gyr 19:46, 11 Jan 2005 (UTC)Improving the page layoutThe methamphetamine article looks better than this article.  Why not just make the pages almost identical, since amphetamine and methamphetamine are exactly the same thing, but meth is more potent due to its ability to cross the blood-brain barrier more rapidly.Amphetamine and Methamphetamine are NOT exactly the same thing. You need to learn some chemistry, guy. Do you know how to compare molecules?Making the pages absolutely identical would be insanely stupid. These two drugs are VERY closely related to each other; no doubt. But they are *NOT* the same. There are all kinds of drugs that are VERY closely related to amphetamine and methamphetamine (take methcathinone, cathinone, ephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine for example). The only differences in each of those are VERY minor; do you want to make those pages exactly identical too?--Ddhix 2002 03:30, 6 Apr 2005 (UTC)This topic name is confusing because the word amphetamine can refer to* the amphetamine class of analog compounds in general* The normal analog of amphetamine which excludes methamphetamine and chloramphetamine* The levo rotary isomer of amphetamine which further excludes dextroamphetamine* Mixtures of amphetamine salts like Adderall.No discussion at all about dextroamphetamine vs l-amphetamineIf the goal is to create a drug monograph then amphetamine usually refers only to l-amphetamine (Benzadrine) then dextroamphetamine (Dexadrine) needs it's own page since the drugs have different  effects and uses.  This should also apply to methamphetamine also since that word usually signifies the d-methamphetamine isomer and not levo-methamphetamine which is available OTC and is not psychoactive.----adding on to the above statement (made by someone else), I highly suggest that someone create an article for dextroamphetamine, levo-amphetamine, and any other basic amphetamine. Make amphetamine a disambiguation page for all of them (amphetamine class, amphetamine analog, everything).It would be preferrable if it was done by someone who is specially educated in this area; not just some encyclopedia-loving joe. This is a chemical ; pharmacological matter, and thus requires special attention toward the finer points.--Ddhix 2002 23:04, 22 Apr 2005 (UTC)I agree with Ddhix.  Dextroamphetamine alraedy has an article.  all of these sorts of articles could use more discussion of the different isomers and their different effects; but as Ddhix says, thats a job for someone who actually knows what they're talking about.  --Heah 20:50, 6 May 2005 (UTC):How long has the merge request for Dextroamphetamine been here? We should really have an article for Amphetamines and another for Amphetamine. magicOgre 03:27, 27 December 2005 (UTC)Just a comment about a fine point: levorotatory and dextroratatory refer to a physical property of a chemical compound: It tells you in which direction a compound will rotate plane polarized light. In terms of absolute structure, the IUPAC requires the use of the (R) and (S) classification. e.g. an (R) isomer of a compound could be either (+) or (-). So, the full name would include both. --Suprblah 8:07, 16 July 2005 (PDT)Table summaryUnder "Side Effects, Severe" the only table entries are "tongue" and "teeth" with absolutely no context. What is that supposed to mean?From the article.''Far, far too many question marks in the tables on the right. More information about amphetamine abuse and more historical/detailed information (related information on the meth- and dextro- variants, the difference beween amphetamine and other similar substances such as phentermine or Ritalin, etc.) Should be more like the Methamphetamine page and should feature a more prominent link to this page for abuse information.'':I think this belongs on the talk page. Matt 19:26, 6 May 2005 (UTC)Clean upI've tidied the page up a little.  Anyone object to the removal of the clean-up tag?  Marcus22 20:18, 3 November 2005 (UTC):yeah looks a lot nicer now than feb this year, still needs work. ive removed Severe Tounge and Severe Teeth side effects. Agnte 13:17, 5 November 2005 (UTC)boldis there a reason why Amphetamine isn't bolded in the intro?--BBLove 06:54, 23 December 2005 (UTC)