UntitledPrevious discussions: Talk:Australian Democrats/Archive 1|Archive 1   Talk:Australian Democrats/Archive 2|Archive 2October 15, 2011Suggest merger of electoral fortunes and history and rewriteHello, I'm going to suggest an edit to merge the history and electoral fortunes sections because they're a bit all over the place and there's a bit of both in each, and there's a whopping great big hole of the late 90s in the middle. I've been reading a lot of academic articles on the dems lately thus have the refs at hand and have some time in the first two weeks of July to do this if there is no objections by then. I've previously declared my work with the party, but haven't been a member since 2010, and everything will be referenced - removing a great deal of the unnecessary commentary that is in the current content. I also take no sides with either of the two versions of the current party.Also going to suggest removal of years and framing of categories more thematically:- Foundation- Early years- Balance of Power- GST deal- Leadership issues- Decline- Party Splitok? Kathoc (talk) 18:17, 8 June 2014 (UTC)Time to end use of WP as dispute battleground?The shilly-shallying of two purported AD parties to establish their respective websites and officebearers under WP endorsement has tested our patience for over two years since Brian Greig , and the latest competing edits can be seen  and . It is not our business to go on hosting such a dispute when we can simply decide which of these two is the real party--and dispense with the bogus one. According to the , the real party's correspondence address is in South Australia, and that is the only party that should be recognised in WP ''until such time as there is a change in the official public record.'' Therefore, take notice that I intend to delete links to the website of the unrecognised group in seven days' time unless valid reasons are presented to the contrary. I have no personal POV in this matter, having resigned from the party in 1993 when it was a completely different organisation. Bjenks (talk) 02:15, 28 October 2014 (UTC):It might be good to add material to the article about the internal (and obviously now external) manoeuvring that has led to the present divided situation. Recent history about the party is very thin in the article. Anything we add would, of course, require excellent sourcing. HiLo48 (talk) 02:40, 28 October 2014 (UTC)::Encyclopedically, the infighting should be ignored as trivia. The recent history is naturally "thin" because there has been little or no public presence. Imho, a great deal of the "Electoral fortunes" content should now be pruned and replaced by one or two paragraphs covering the Kernot-Lees period and the GST hubris, followed by a short exposition of the subsequent electoral rejection and demise. To date, I've disqualified myself from this because of my past POV issues. If no other editor is interested in taking it on, I would see that as another reasonable signal to prune the whole content into a more digestible article. Bjenks (talk) 23:03, 4 November 2014 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 6 external links on Australian Democrats. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive *Added archive *Added archive to *Added archive to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20081123082003/toCheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:46, 13 July 2015 (UTC)