__TOC__Donetsk and Luhansk People's RepublicWhat about the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republic? They recognized each other as well as partially recognized South Ossetia. VanyaTihonov (talk) 21:04, 21 December 2015 (UTC):Please read through the archives before posting a question that has been discussed many times over. They do not even begin to fit the criteria. See the :List of states with limited recognition and its talk page for even more details. --Iryna Harpy (talk) 21:15, 21 December 2015 (UTC):The main obstacle which prevents their inclusion in the list are reliable sources which state that they meet the declarative theory of statehood. Until those are found, its likely consensus will change regarding inclusion. In regards to the constitutive theory, as South Ossetia is not recognized by a majority of states, its recognition of the eastern Ukrainian republics is insufficient per the inclusion criteria of this page.XavierGreen (talk) 14:13, 22 December 2015 (UTC):: Transnistria and Nagorno-Karabakh, and Somaliland already included in the list, despite the fact that the first two recognize only partially recognized states (Abkhazia and South Ossetia), and Somaliland — no one at all. VanyaTihonov (talk) 12:24, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::Basically the criteria for inclusion for this list do not equal the criteria that would apply to the declarative theory of statehood. The criteria for inclusion seem to be rather random to me. Gerard von Hebel (talk) 12:53, 29 December 2015 (UTC)::::The criteria for inclusion are essentially that we have to be able to demonstrate in each case that the notion that a state legally exists is at least a "significant viewpoint" per WP:WEIGHT.  WP:WEIGHT gives a useful three-point list:::::Our criteria are effectively codifying this list in this context.  Putative states in the first two bullets - majority and significant minority views - are included (in one part of the list or the other - we have to get the relative weight between those two points correct as well).  Putative states where the POV that they legally exist is held only by "extremely small (or vastly limited) minority" (of reliable sources, not Wikipedia editors) - where there is no significant evidence from academics, lawyers or diplomats that a state legally exists - are not included.::::Now, are our criteria a perfect way of codifying these principles?   Of course not.  But I think perfection is probably impossible and I think we could discuss this for an awfully long time without coming up with anything better. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';13:53, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::Transnistria, NKR and Somaliland are included because there are reliable sources that state that they meet the declarative theory of statehood, demonstrated in previous discussions.  There are two different rules for inclusion and meeting either is enough.  Donetsk and Luhansk meet neither. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';13:53, 29 December 2015 (UTC)::::Kahastok, thanks for your remarks. The criteria for inclusion in this article are:::::* (a) consider themselves sovereign (through a declaration of independence or some other means) and are often regarded as satisfying the declarative theory of statehood, ''or''::::* (b) are recognised as a sovereign state by at least one UN member state::::Donjesk and Lugansk comply with (a) in the sense that they consider themselves sovereign. The rest of (a) is unclear to me. “Often regarded”? What on earth does that mean? Further note that (a) and (b) are separated by the word “or”. So either (a) “or” (b) will do, apparently. (B) is also problematic in itself. Why do UN member states get to have a say because they are UN member states? The UN is not a state and is certainly not in the business of recognising or not recognising states. The UN has itself declared that it has no authority to do so. So why do UN member states get an extraordinary position? Even when it's just one? What is that based on?::::The word “or” in between a and b, has always stricken me as patently absurd. It may have been designed to include states that do not consider themselves sovereign (notably Niue and the Cook Islands), but have diplomatic relations with other states. Note however that diplomatic relations does not equate state recognition, which is another thing this (and other related) articles suggests that is highly doubtful. So on the basis of these criteria? Donjetsk and Lughansk in and Niue and the Cook Islands out! Gerard von Hebel (talk) 14:27, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::::The inclusion criteria have always been difficult to articulate and to demonstrate, so, in the end, it is WP:CONSENSUS that has had the final say.  But in the case of the two so-called "states" in the Donbass there is absolutely no consensus because they are the result not of a locally-grown independence movement, but of a Russian invasion--first by special forces operatives only (who posed as "locals" and initiated the so-called declarations of independence) and soon after by both special forces operatives and regular Russian military units.  Even Russia, their sponsor and supplier of all their military hardware, has publicly stated that they are to remain part of Ukraine.  They simply have no basis for existence when their originator, sustainer, and guarantor has stated that they are part of Ukraine.  --Taivo (talk) 16:01, 29 December 2015 (UTC)::::::Is that so? How do we establish that and that is different from Abchazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria how exactly? And if it's just up to consensus, why bother with criteria for inclusion at all? Gerard von Hebel (talk) 16:41, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::::::First question, using reliable sources that say that those three meet the criteria for the declarative theory, or are recognised by one or more UN member states - both points are lacking in the case of Donetsk and Luhansk.  That is, we go back to the criteria.  Second question, we have criteria so that we have something we can measure against.  The question of consensus is as to whether there is consensus that the criteria are met, or not, as opposed to consensus as to whether a state exists or not.  If we didn't have criteria for inclusion, there would be no reason to include anything and no reason not to include everything, regardless of whether it was a state, a kind of cheese or an abstract concept. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';16:59, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::::The point behind "often regarded" is that it is not us judging whether the declarative theory is met.  We aren't allowed to make that judgement.  It is reliable sources that have to make the judgement.:::::It is not the fact that they are UN member states ''per se'' that would in principle be important.  If large numbers of well-established and universally-uncontroversial states were not UN member states we would probably need to come up with some other rule.  But we spent literally ''years'' trying to find a sensible dividing line between those states that are near-universally uncontroversial and those putative states that have little acceptance - between the first two points in the list from WP:WEIGHT - and this was the best we could come up with.  I see no appetite to repeat that debate.:::::And it works.  What we're saying here is that no diplomat, academic or international lawyer ''on the planet'' accepts Donetsk and Luhansk as states, except for the claimed government of a claimed state, that itself is rejected by the vast majority of the international community.  To my eye, that puts it very clearly in the third category from the list at WP:WEIGHT: a viewpoint that "is held by an extremely small (or vastly limited) minority", and thus "does not belong on Wikipedia, regardless of whether it is true or you can prove it".::::::And the "or"?  Firstly because there are two different theories of statehood and each could be taken as valid.  It's a neutral choice to allow either.  Second, from a purely practical perspective, try proving the case that the United States or France or India meet the declarative theory.  It's actually quite difficult.  Nobody does that analysis because there's no reason why they need to: every lawyer, diplomat and academic on the planet would accept these as states without a second thought. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';17:18, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::::::Thank you for that reasoned response, User:Kahastok.  There are two further differences that separate Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Transnistria from Donbass--stability over time and defined borders.  The two former have been pseudo-states since 2008 and Transnistria since 1992.  In all three cases, there are well-understood borders that can be delineated on a map and have been "fixed" since the end of the armed conflicts that created them.  That is certainly not true of Donbass.  Just this week the Russian terrorists captured a Ukrainian town near Mariupol and shifted the "borders" again.  So add this lack of stability and the lack of defined borders to the virtually total lack of recognition from the international community (including their Russian creator) and you have no criteria for including them in this list, even as "disputed states".  --Taivo (talk) 19:25, 29 December 2015 (UTC)Basically my concerns are more about the criteria for inclusion and how we deal with them than about Donjetsk and Lugansk. The criteria are self declared by the consensus of the Wikipedia community. If we as editors have to determine whether secondary or even primary sources confirm or deny, that entity X answers our self imposed criteria, then we have a lot of interpreting to do when it comes to reading the sources. Specially because our criteria are basically of no concern to the authors of these sources. Too much interpreting of sources borders on WP:SYNTH. Which is problematic. I believe that is one of the main problems wit this list and some others. This is well illustrated by the question surrounding Niue and the Cook Islands that this community hasn't been able to solve one way or the other for many years now. Also we seem to introduce the criterium of outside intervention and ongoing conflict to keep Donjetsk and Lugansk off the list. If asked, I could argue that South-Ossetia, Transnistria and Abkhazia came about in much the same way. Gerard von Hebel (talk) 21:44, 29 December 2015 (UTC):This can be said for nearly every article in Wikipedia.  That's why we establish criteria as best we can based on a consensus of reliable sources, but in the end a consensus of Wikipedia editors is required to overcome every single inherent POV that we carry concerning X or Y.  Even reliable sources can point in different directions.  We have to rely in the collective intelligence and reasonableness of Wikipedia editors to discuss and come to an agreement.  No combination of wikilawyered policies or rules can ever substitute for consensus in the end.  In this article, we have come to a stable consensus over the years on how to deal with difficult situations.  In almost every case, a consensus has been built.  Cook Islands and Niue do not abrogate the stability of that consensus.  Indeed, they might be called the exceptions that prove the rule.  --Taivo (talk) 21:48, 29 December 2015 (UTC):(ec) I disagree with you in your argument that "our criteria are basically of no concern to the authors of these sources".  For the most part, actually the opposite is true, at least for the declarative theory.  The sources we want are trying to determine - academically, legally - whether a state exists, precisely the aim of our inclusion criteria.  Being a state is a Very Big Deal as has been said, and this is a rule that academics and lawyers can take a view on.  And the recognition rule takes very little interpretation - either there is recognition or there is not.  There's no middle ground or room for error.:Niue and the Cook Islands are an excellent illustration of why I made the case, earlier, "I think perfection is probably impossible and I think we could discuss this for an awfully long time without coming up with anything better".   The Cook Islands and Niue are - entirely deliberately - ambiguous about whether they are sovereign states or not.  There is no dispute - the rest of the world accepts that they are whatever they say they are.  We have to make a call.  We can't just not decide - either they are in or they are not in the list.  If we come up with another set of criteria - almost no matter what they are, so long as they're sensible - the same issue will still arise because it arises in real life. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';22:07, 29 December 2015 (UTC)::Thank you both for engaging in this conversation. I appreciate that these are not easy questions to solve. I must admit that the Niue and Cook Island question is my greatest bother when it comes to this list, because they themselves and New Zealand have issued a letter of understanding in which the parties involved don't seem to regard those two states as sovereign, although I must also admit that there are many distracting factors in that particular situation. The other thing that bothers me (sorry for all the tiresome complaining) is that the declarative theory is described as dominant in the article. I know that there is a source for that but I also think it's just an opinion by the author. In practice good old Westphalian sovereignty is still around when it comes to how states actually act in these matters. I also admit that basing criteria for inclusion on that theory of statehood might give us some problems as well... When I say that "our criteria are basically of no concern to the authors of these sources" I mean to say that our criteria, as written down in the body of the article, do not precisely equal the declarative theory (there is an "or" involved and I think that even the declarative theory frowns upon declaring statehood on territory that is legally part of another state, Abbkazia, South-Ossetia, Transnistria, Northern-Cyprus etc), so authors of sources probably write what they are writing without being aware of the intricacies of what would be appropriate for this particular list. Gerard von Hebel (talk) 22:16, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::Our criteria are intended to include states that meet either theory.  So, if it meets the declarative theory only, it's in.  If it meets the constitutive theory only (based on a single recognition by a UN member state), it's in.:::The way we do the declarative theory demands a certain amount of evidence.  It is insufficient for a source to simply say that a state exists, or that the declarative theory is met.  The source has to explicitly invoke the declarative theory to argue that a state exists.  That is what is required to meet, according to consensus, the requirements of WP:NOR.  We have that for the three entries for which it matters: Nagorno-Karabakh, Transnistria and Somaliland.  All the rest can make do with the constitutive theory anyway - they are all recognised by at least on UN member state.:::On the point that the declarative theory is dominant, I must admit I have no real feel for that (though I note that it was applied by the EEC in the Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia).  The institutions for which this is most important - the states themselves when they decide whether to recognise or not - will almost always take political considerations into account in practice. ''Kahastok'' ''talk'';23:08, 29 December 2015 (UTC):::A few points points that may have already been covered above::::Why restrict the inclusion criteria to only consider recognition to UN member states?  It's a recursive definition (a state is anything recognized by a state), so logically we need some basis from which to measure (ie "known states").  Then we can test whether other things are states by seeing if they are recognized by the "known states".  In principal we could choose any set of "known states" (the US, EU member states, Laos, Portuguese speaking countries) and determine what else meets the definition.  In practice there has to be some limit on the set of states from which recognition meets the criteria, otherwise someone would argue that Sealand and the Principality of Hutt River recognize each other and thus satisfy the criteria.  So how do we define this set?  There's lots of literature that argues that recognition from mostly unrecognized states is effectively meaningless.  The UN member states is an easily verifiable set of states which are generally recognized.  The point is we include first order mostly unrecognized states, but not second order mostly unrecognized states (ie mostly unrecognized states which themselves are only recognized by mostly unrecognized states).  Given that South Ossetia is itself a fringe state, things it recognize are even more fringe.:::Why the OR?  Part a) covers the declarative theory and b) the constitutive theory.  This list includes all states that meet one definition or the other.  So states which don't meet the declarative theory of statehood but are recognized (ie arguably Palestine) or states that meet the declarative theory of statehood but aren't recognized (ie Somaliland) are both included.  We deliberatly don't define the declarative theory in the criteria to allow sources to interpret it as they see fit and avoid SYN.  TDL (talk) 05:56, 30 December 2015 (UTC):As I stated above, the reason Donetsk, Luhansk, and even the Islamic State are not included in the list is not because they don't meet the declarative theory of statehood, it is that no one as of yet has shown a reliable source which states that they meet the declarative theory of statehood.XavierGreen (talk) 15:14, 31 December 2015 (UTC)::Yes, the same goes for Sealand.  TDL (talk) 22:48, 31 December 2015 (UTC)Talk:List of state leaders in 2016#RfC: Inclusion of Palestine as a sub state of IsraelFile:Farm-Fresh eye.png|15px|link=|alt=You are invited to join the discussion at Talk:List of state leaders in 2016#RfC: Inclusion of Palestine as a sub state of Israel. ;#x0020;Could you please give your opinion on whether or not Palestine should be considered a separate sovereign entity from Israel? Many thanks Spirit Ethanol (talk) 23:11, 11 February 2016 (UTC)Use of Country/Geopolitical Faction Infobox on Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic pagesAn edit war over which infobox to use on the DPR and LPR pages has been ongoing for several months now. In an attempt to remedy the situation i have opened up a discussion and request for comment here Talk:Donetsk_People%27s_Republic#Infobox, your opinions and comments on the issue would be much appreciated.XavierGreen (talk) 06:15, 13 February 2016 (UTC)Duplicate entriesSeveral countries are listed more than once, with a link to the main entry.  In several cases, this is clearly an alternative name linking to the main entry (e.g. Sudan, South → South Sudan), but for others, I can't see any difference.  Am I missing something, or should these be removed?  (easiest way to find them all: sort table by name.  They will all be at the bottom).* Abkhazia → Abkhazia* Cook Islands → Cook Islands* Kosovo → Kosovo* Nagorno-Karabakh → Nagorno-Karabakh* Niue → Niue* Northern Cyprus → Northern Cyprus* Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic → Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic* Somaliland → Somaliland* South Ossetia → South Ossetia* Sudan, South → South Sudan* Taiwan (Republic of China) → Taiwan* Transnistria → TransnistriaIapetus (talk) 16:23, 1 March 2016 (UTC):Some of them are mentioned in the main entry but don't belong there because they are not universally recognized states and are in the other entry. I don't think that Niue and the Cook Islands belong in the list at all. Gerard von Hebel (talk) 16:35, 1 March 2016 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on List of sovereign states. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' or '''failed''' to let others know (documentation at Sourcecheck).Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;18:33, 2 March 2016 (UTC)