QuestionWas Terry Wogan really on a pirate ship as the text suggests. Doubts about others, too.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Les woodland (talk • Special:Contributions/Les woodland|contribs) 16:30, 1 October 2007 (UTC);;; ;;ProblemRadio 1 runs 'One Big Weekend' every year, a free 2 day concert. Radio 1 also sponsors a stage at the reading and leeds festivals each yearChris Moyles weekly roundup is #1 UK podcast... Radio 1 diversifying by suppling podcasts and such''So what sort of material do they have on this radio station?  Pop music?  Golden oldies?  Talkback?  Sports?  This entry is useless for somebody who hasn't already been exposed to the station.'' --Robert MerkelCheck out their website and find out www.bbc.co.uk/radio1Explicit image size vs thumbnailIs there any reason to use a constant width of 200px for the logo instead of using individual users' preferences for thumbnails?  I use Wikipedia on my PC and on a mobile/PDA.  On my PC, both settings look pretty similar.  However, on my PDA the logo is way too big at 200px, but looks great if set as a thumbnail because I have set thumbnail display to 120px in Special:Preferences.  --Throup (talk) 18:49, 16 October 2005 (UTC)ScheduleIs this information really enyclopedic? Seems a bit too much like fancruft, or just simply useless information to me. Robdurbar 00:30, 30 November 2005 (UTC):I came here to say the same. It seems to me that a current schedule is not encyclopedic, and we are not the Radio Times. Why a current schedule and not, say, the schedule from the week of launch? I'm going to remove it. --kingboyk 21:26, 15 April 2006 (UTC):I was thinking the same. Schedules have been removed from other Wikipedia radio pages so I think it's best if they're gone.--User:AntL|AntL User talk:AntL|talk;14:49, 15 April 2007 (UTC)::The Schedule seems to have returned as History/Today. Could it be removed again? Oh, and the programming section.Kaleeyed (talk) 01:38, 14 November 2011 (UTC)Sirius Satellite RadioBBC Radio 1 is now carried by Sirius, I see no mention of this in the article. I also see no mention of the fact that it is not a live mirrored stream of Radio 1 (what sirius broadcasts and what BBC Radio 1 webcasts are different).User:Alkivar|'''ALKIVAR''';/font;User_talk:Alkivar|™Image:Radioactive.svg|18px| 10:07, 13 January 2006 (UTC)' In July of 2005, Sirius Satellite Radio began simulcasting Radio 1 across the United States on channel 11, and Sirius Canada began simulcasting Radio 1 when they launched on December 1, 2005 (also on channel 11). The simulcast is timeshifted five hours to allow US and Canadian listeners in the Eastern Time Zone to hear Radio 1 at the same time of day as UK listeners.'- taken from the article Robdurbar 10:11, 13 January 2006 (UTC)bobby friction and nihalneeds some more info about bobby and nihal's show on R1 - at the moment they are only mentioned and have no page of their own and the nihal link goes to the wrong page.any bobby and nihal fans want to help out? —The preceding unsigned comment was added by 81.178.179.109 (talk • Special:Contributions/81.178.179.109|contribs) 18:02, April 12, 2006  (UTC{});;;TransmittersAnyone know about where the transmitters are etc for Radio 1?  This could easily be it's own sub-article if someone knows anything...--Gavinio 08:17, 4 August 2006 (UTC)Go to for details of the transmitters, and then use the National Grid References (NGR) and site names at and respectively for exact locations, etc. Hope this is of help to you. - Sean Cooper 22:46, 30 September 2007 (UTC)NewsbeatI've added a short bit about Newsbeat and linked it into the main article.  I can't stand Newsbeat do maybe someone else would be better at expanding this section. --MikeNolan 20:20, 7 August 2006 (UTC)----Censorship?Unfortunately Radio 1 has had a history of musical censorship during its history. During the tenure of Matthew Banister the station refused to play British Hip Hop after the political connotations of the Rodney King beatings. In fact it took years for Radio 1 to recognise Hip Hop especially in the mid Eighties. Another sub Genre was Hi Energy. This sub Culture associated with the  Gay nightclub scene in the late 1970's / early 1980's was blacklisted from Radio 1 play lists. And Finally up to date , the station has still refused to come to terms with Gabba , Happy Hardcore and Scouse dance genres.If you think that is ridiculous during the first Gulf War in !991 they refused to play "Massive Attack" because of their programming rules. Daft.:True that Radio 1 has made a few daft censorship decisions in the past. I can't remember any offhand, but there have been one or two that have made me scratch my head and think "Why?!":However, Radio 1, as it's name would suggest, is intended to reach a wide audience. I'm not sure that many people would be keen on Ultraviolence or Aphex Twin in the middle of their drive to work. Remember that Radio 1 was the first legal station in this country to play Jungle and Drum'n'Bass, way before Kiss FM was even begun. They often have themed nights where they will play the more eclectic music, I have been introduced to various electronica through Radio 1. And with regards to the gay music: I was taping Bronski Beat songs off the radio in the early-mid 80s, I don't think you can have more of a gay anthem than Small Town Boy!:Just because a radio station isn't playing much of what is actually a very niche genre of music doesn't mean they are censoring music. For instance, a year or two back I saw Ultraviolence in London and there were no more than 200 people in the whole gig, including Johnny himself and the angle-grinder-woman. Radio 1 play a lot of "proper" music, i.e. not bubblegum pop/teeny bop. They can't cater for everything, but I bet if you were to listen 24/7 for a month you would hear some Gabba, Happy Hardcore or Scouse. Probably at 4 am, but that's always been the penalty for liking a minority genre. —The preceding unsigned comment was added by Special:Contributions/81.86.138.193|81.86.138.193 (talk) 23:58, 10 April 2007 (UTC).;;;I disagree with the comments of the second paragraph. The mandate of Radio 1 is to play new innovative music. Its demographic is 13 to 27 year old listeners. They are expecting cutting edge and what they get is Chris Moyles. Also when John Peel passed away the decision to change the muisc policy on his late slot was very telling. No one can say that they have continued the policy of Peels to play anything. Radio 1 has lost its way. It has put too much focus on Dance music. Look at the weekend shows . Also the station has stifled and obstructed musical innovation and development in the UK by avoiding certain music genres. An example is the continued employment of Pete Tong. His programming choices have destroyed innovation and development in electronic dance music by playing trance and progressive house for the last 10 years. There has to be a big sea change in Radio 1 if it wants to remain relevant to its listeners.:Unfortunately I still can't remember my password, but I am the poster of the second paragraph... I maintain what I said before, but I would like to comment on the third paragraph... the fact is, Gabba, Happy Hardcore and Scouse Dance are neither cutting edge nor innovative. From what I've seen at live events and from lifts in a Gabba-loving friend's car, and I realise this is subjective, Gabba is a sub-genre of Techno, devised for people who are excited by large values of bpm. It's like people who buy processors based on GHz alone. More is not necessarily better ;-) Happy Hardcore peaked in 1992. Scouse isn't really a proper genre in itself, more just a subset of House that WAS more popular in Liverpool than anywhere else... In London, the only times I've heard it mentioned is when I'm talking to people who have lived in Liverpool! Perhaps I don't like House well enough to tell the difference, maybe it's my taste. Which brings us back to the original point... there are millions of Radio 1 listeners across the whole world. Even if they just look at the UK listeners, I think you'll be hard-pressed to find enough people who would actually listen to a Gabba set to make it worthwhile. I've definitely heard some Altern-8 in the last few months at about 2am (so that's Happy Hardcore covered). And let's face it: If you're into a genre enough to feel passionately about it's lack of airplay, you're probably deep enough into it that there's nothing new they can show you! I wouldn't expect the licence-payer to fulfill my need for late-60s proto-electronica Kosmische by playing some Organisation or Tangerine Dream... If anyone asks me about the origins of modern electronic music, they can come to my house and listen to the vinyl. If they want to know about the origins of pre-war electronic music, I'll power up my theremin and bore them to death on how it relates to analogue synths they would have heard in 1980s techno. I love the music but I realise it is purely history to most.:So to summarise, breaking cutting-edge music to the masses is a wonderful mission. However, music that is now retro (that includes Gabba and Happy Hardcore) cannot be "broken" to the masses, and is unlikely to be nostalgic to those who didn't enjoy it when it was en vogue. As it is an acquired taste, it will not be enjoyed by many: whilst music-lovers such as me and presumably you would press on to the end and enjoy it for its uniqueness, most would turn over or turn off. So, it has no place on prime-time Radio 1. I'm sure it's only a matter of time before their web presence includes a library of eclectica, so we'll all be happy then!!! :-)  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/81.107.182.109|81.107.182.109 (talk) 01:19, 13 November 2007 (UTC);;; ;;Just thought i would add that the new controller for Radio 1 is pushing "pop" music over alternative, rock, and dance genres in its playlists. So again Radio 1 is out of sync with the audience they are supposed to serve. And why did they not put Basshunter on its playlist, even when it got to number one in the Gallup charts? Nutty.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/217.44.35.236|217.44.35.236 (talk) 20:45, 25 January 2008 (UTC);;; ;;The is hardcore music on radio1 atm unfortunately it is only on the second week every month but it is on their its on Kutskis In New DJs We Trust show.  I think radio one and in particular Pete Tong does a lot for all kinds Dance of music on radio1.  He is the one who decides the In New DJs We Trust DJs and not forgetting the essential mix which has probably played nearly every type of electronica music including mid nineties cheesy happy hardcore. --Special:Contributions/82.37.226.217|82.37.226.217 (talk) 17:14, 23 April 2008 (UTC)______________________________________________________________Censorship with a small 'c' from the beginning, a fans eye view:THE MUSIC THEY PLAY CAN INFLUENCE YOUThe government clampdown I’m thinking of goes back further than that to 1967 – the magic year of rock’n’roll.  The air was full of wonderous music courtesy of the pirate ship radio stations Radio Carolyn and Radio London.  D.J.’s would say things like: “It’s a bitter-cold morning out, why not forget work , stay in bed and listen to the latest from Donovan – Sunshine Superman…..” without pirate radio left-of–field classics like Unit Four Plus Two “Concrete ; Clay” would never have come to light.But the idea that a major section of the media could tread anything but the party line rankled the establishment and in late August 1967  “radical”, “left wing” M.P. Tony Benn in his position of Postmaster General banned pirate radio and gave responsibility for purveying rock music back to the BBC.So in August (?) 1967 Radio 1 was ushered in to the ringing tones of The Move’s “Flowers In The Rain”.  Nothing had changed – or had it?  Rock music which had galvanised a generation together was being murdered.  In Britain the BBC decided to divide and rule so you got music that appealed to the over 30’s (Jazz, Gordon Lightfoot etc.) played on Radio 2, and music that appealed to the under 30’s (Glitter bands, Bowie,) played on 1.  The Hippies were being strangled with their own head bands – the only ‘classic’ that was played with any regularity on Radio 1 was Jeff Beck’s “Hi Ho Silver Lining” with it’s reactionary and sarcastic “You’re everywhere and nowhere baby…..(in your hippie hat)”  We beatniks/hippies were basically being told to forget dreams of revolution, get out of bed and get to work.  Get married, have kids and knuckle-under for Thatcher’s sake!  We were being shown the evil of our ways.Mud , Status Quo, and the odd Captain Beefheart track played once a week on the John Peel show might not have been so bad but it was watered down with endless trivial chatter from the D.J.’s and Beatles tunes played by the Northern Dance Orchestra – you’d think the Queen had died!  Radio 2 was more Acker Bilk than Charlie Parker, more recipes than Ronettes – Divide, dumb-down, and rule (Britannia). So Rock music in Britain became less the hands-on innovation of the Kinks and more the slightly sickly, overblown, dressed up, camp of Queen.  The strength of John Lennon was replaced by the yobbishness of Slade and the youth of Britain followed suite on the streets.  Under station master Derek Chinnery there was talk of ex RAF types stalking the corridors of the Radio 1 section of Broadcasting House marshalling the ex-pirate D.J.’s (given jobs by the Beeb to bring the fans over from the ships) to toe the line.  Anything political or what they termed ‘morbid’ wasn’t played.In the fashion of playing soothing music to milking cows Radio 1 ; Radio 2 do their bit to keep the birth rate up by pumping out a constant diet of love/sex songs be they rock, pop, acid, or rap; an example would be Marvin Gaye ; Tammi Tyrell’s “It Takes Two” which seemed to open every Jimmy Young show,and still to this day gets played about 3 times per week.  Talk about ‘mind-control to Major Tom’.Were there any casualties?  - the rockdreams of 10 million listeners; and folk rock singer Nick Drake who committed suicide after pestering his producer to know why his works of art weren’t making it, to be told they didn’t fit the optimistic bland-out of the monopolistic Beeb.Heavy 1960’s airplay given to Engelbert’s misogynistic Release Me was replaced by 1980’s repeat playing of The Eagles’ pro settling-down Desperado.  The Chi-Lites soul classic on teenage alienation: The Coldest Days of My Life was played once by Tony Blackburn on Radio 1 back in 1970 and never again, whereas their Homely Girl and Have You Seen Her became the stations background melodies of the seventies and eighties.The Beatles split up and the thrill had gone.  Led Zeppelin could have taken up the rock cudgels from them but their 1969 rock anthem Whole Lotta Love was only played the once on Alan Freeman’s Pick Of The Pops, I remember switching on and catching the last ten seconds of it.   Dylan, heeding the rulers warning of a (broken neck?) motorbike accident, and not wishing to go the way of John Lennon 20, and Lady Di 30 years later, went into retirement.Alan Griffey 23rd February 2008  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Alan Griffey (talk • Special:Contributions/Alan Griffey|contribs) 21:29, 23 February 2008 (UTC);;; ;;:A small point, but you're misrepresenting Wedgewood-Benn.  For a start, despite being well on the left wing of the party, he in fact prevaricated against outlawing the offshore stations.  In the end Wilson promoted him out of the job and gave the position to Edward Short, who lost no time in pushing the legislation through.:Ironically, it was Wilson who lowered the voting age to 18, then he shut down the offshore stations and Labour lost the next election.  Dumb, dumb, dumb. :D Deke42 (talk) 22:08, 31 May 2012 (UTC)Thoughts on this artical==This artical is good but its its abit wordy and their are no tables to display infomation which helps to digest infoTrivial matter - logoThe Radio 1 logo used on wikipedia is out of date... it has changed slightly. see: The photo was ammended on this article yesterday, and so is correct. '''User_talk:Tiddly Tom|Tiddly Tom''' 12:32, 10 August 2007 (UTC)Theme OneI am surprised there is no mention of Theme One in the section of the start of programme on the first day of Radio 1.  --jmb 16:45, 30 September 2007 (UTC)Schedule addedThe Radio 1 Schedule will change every month from until the end of the year. There is a major change from September and minor changes every month after until January. I will keep the shedule up to date.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Chriskart (talk • Special:Contributions/Chriskart|contribs) 13:34, 22 August 2008 (UTC);;; ;;:Unfortunate adding UK radio and TV schedules [without paying a royality is a '''criminal offence''']. --User:AxG/Userpage|Special:Contributions/AxG|User talk:AxG| 13:42, 22 August 2008 (UTC)::Yep, I will do some more reading to clarify, but as it stands to my knowledge, that schedule will have to go ASAP. Regardless, current schedules are a violation of What Wikipedia is not policy. --User:Tghe-retford|tghe;/b;retford (talk);17:55, 22 August 2008 (UTC):::Hmm... the (now Red Bee) Broadcasting Dataservices page has changed since that discussion that AxG brought up to now say TV listings. Again, I will check the Broadcasting Act 1990 to make sure. My comment on policy violation still stands. --User:Tghe-retford|tghe;/b;retford (talk);18:04, 22 August 2008 (UTC)::::I've checked through Google, the law applies to BBC TV and Radio Schedules, ITV and Channel 4 schedules. Schedules, regardless of how written is copyrighted of the aforementioned company, violating WP:C and has to go. --User:Tghe-retford|tghe;/b;retford (talk);18:19, 22 August 2008 (UTC)Gap in contentThere seems to be a major gap in this page; it jumps almost straight from the opening year or so to the mid-1990s, with almost nothing on some of the developments in between such as "Sounds of the Seventies" or the live folk half-hour (which featured live sessions from acts such as Fairport Convention, Pentangle and Shirley Collins.Jon Rob (talk) 09:45, 15 September 2008 (UTC)No mention of Mike Read either. --DeeKay (talk) 15:20, 3 March 2010 (UTC)RecentlyMaybe you should right a section on how bad the quality of the music is that is being played nowadays  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Lukestar1991 (talk • Special:Contributions/Lukestar1991|contribs) 12:16, 2 November 2008 (UTC);;; ;;Contradiction?''Fearne Cotton will become the first regular female presenter of the UK Top 40. Jo Whiley was the first female presenter of the UK Top 40 on November 24, 2002''These two statements appear to contradict each other.  If JW was the first how can FC also be the first?  Unless it means: ''while JW did present the show she did so ''onlyoccasionally and as a guest'': FC was the first to ''regularly'' present it ie as a headline presenter....''  Clarification required... User:Jubileeclipman|Jubilee♫User talk:Jubileeclipman|clipman;/font; 17:31, 20 December 2008 (UTC)DrivetimeI have edited this section as it previously implied that the show had always been 4-7, whereas it used to be different during the Dave Pearce days. Zacitty (talk) 19:19, 5 January 2009 (UTC)One Big WeekendsThe format of these changed before 2003: I can remember the Dance Day being cancelled in Manchester. If someone could do some research and correct it that would be cool. Zacitty (talk) 19:19, 5 January 2009 (UTC)Unencyclopedic content"Nowadays Joel Lees (JoelyMusic) of Colchester Essex is the newest up and coming artist on the BBC payroll. The difference is that now its not just DJs, its artists as well. Just shows how things can change with time."has been removed. It's unencyclopedic, citation free and appears to have nothing to do with the origins of radio 1 (being stashed right after the addition of Annie Nightingale)--Shadebug (talk) 01:43, 22 June 2010 (UTC)Annie NightingaleI think the claim that Annie was Britain's first female DJ needs some clarification.  English transmissions from Radio Luxembourg had occasional female DJs, and a couple of the smaller fort based 60s stations had female presenters. Annie was probably the first who could be clearly heard throughout the nation though. --Deke42 (talk) 22:22, 31 May 2012 (UTC)Spoken articleWhatever happened to the 1980s?What a strange article! There were various changes to Radio 1 in the 1980s and it had a very large audience - features like "Our Tune" (beginning in 1980) and The Steve Wright In The Afternoon show of the mid-to-late '80s are still widely remembered, but the 1980s are not featured at all - the article flips from an unsubstantiated "70s Peak" to "Changes in the 90s". Highly odd!  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/86.142.180.211|86.142.180.211 (talk) 17:51, 26 February 2013 (UTC);; ;;Schedule changes - would a table be better?They're changing the schedule ''again'':Would it be better to represent the schedule as a table? I could probably make a table for it but it would take a while so if anyone thinks it's a really stupid idea tell me here and I won't bother. NemesisAT (talk) 16:35, 5 June 2014 (UTC):As shown above, a schedule table goes against WP:NOTRADIOGUIDE and without paying royalties is also Wikipedia_talk:Copyright_problems/Archive_8#Potential_legal_issue_with_UK_Radio_station_schedules_within_articles|a criminal offence. So it's probably not the best idea. Also, the changes don't take place until September so I undid your edit, nothing personal :) -User:BZTMPS|'''''BZTMPS''''' ★;/font; · User talk:BZTMPS|(talk?;/font; Special:Contributions/BZTMPS|contribs?);/font; 16:40, 5 June 2014 (UTC)::I'm very glad I checked now - Thanks for the quick response. NemesisAT (talk) 17:17, 5 June 2014 (UTC)