Miscellaneous comments:a famous cartoonist is defined as one whose art, or work in general was recognized by more than one million people during the time when the cartoons were actively drawn.If we do need to have some specific cut-off point (I'm skeptical...), declaring that "famous cartoonist" means ''exactly'' such-and-such sounds a bit paradoxical.  (I.e., I thought I knew what "famous cartoonist" meant, but I didn't know that it meant ''that''...) --LMSApart from that, a million would make a looong list. I bet every country with more than 5-10 million inhabitants has a few cartoonists localy "famous" under this definition, but not widely known outside this nation. E.g. I do not know Capp, and Nash only as a poet (as do the authors of his page, BTW) --Robbe-----"Famous" should be dropped because like so many other qualifying words beginning lists all the list REALLY is is what wikipedians care enough to type.  I changed "Important Latin Poets" to "Surviving Latin Poets" earlier today.  "Important" is (a)less accurate {the list included Propertius, who is as fine an example of a minor poet as one could wish} and (b) potentially non-neutral.  I love the idea of a million-reader-cut-off, but who was counting and when?  Just say "Cartoonists with or soon to have individual entries" and be done with it. --MichaelTinkler----Many cartoons, particularly in comic book format,  by large publishing houses like Marval, DC, Disney are made by teams of artists, as work for hire.  The notion of individual creator does break down substantially.----Why have a list of cartoonists AND a list of comic creators? Plus a Category:Cartoonists? We should put some order in this. -- KS:I agree that the cartoonist/comics artist distinction is very confusing, but that problem isn't unique to Wikipedia.  Depending on who you talk to, "cartoonist" can mean someone who works mostly in a single-panel or newspaper strip format, or a comics artist who also writes the comic, or any illustrator who draws in a cartoon style.  Note that the list of comic creators currently includes both writers and artists, whereas "Cartoonists" clearly doens't include writers like Neil Gaiman.  We also now have :Category:Comics writers and :Category:Comics artists, which seem to be focused on people working in the ''comic-book'' format, rather than single panels or strips... which seems pretty clear to me, except that there are plenty of people who both write and draw, who then get double-listed or else dumped into "Cartoonists".  I don't really have a better suggestion; I think the subject is just inherently confusing.  But whatever the scheme ends up being, it would be good to have clearer descriptive text at the tops of the categories and the list articles. User:Hob|;#8592;Hob 21:29, 2004 Aug 24 (UTC)::Yeah, the usage seems a little bt confusing...----I change the words "single panel comic strips". According to many other comic fans (most notably me =S) there is no such thing as a "single panel comic strip", a comic strip must, per definition, include at least 2 "panels", telling a sequential story.----I removed * Drew B. White, ''Illustrated Insanity'' and promise to return this entry pending the results of vote for deletion. '''''oo64eva (AJ)''''' 02:20, Apr 3, 2005 (UTC)----I don't get the action/superhero distinction at the end, some of those aren't action/superhero cartoonists, they're just cartoonists, especially Jeff Smith.--Hiding 22:54, 3 May 2005 (UTC)Cartoonist identityWhen searching for the subject "cartoonist" there is a photo of a man drawing a comic strip.  The tagline says he's drawing the comic strip "Shoe".  No, he is not.  The man in the photo is Dick Locher and he's drawing the comic strip "Dick Tracy." Jeff MacNelly drew Shoe.''Anonymous comment moved from Wikipedia:Village pump (news)''OmissionsI am frankly astonished at some of the people not mentioned.  How can you omit Chester Gould, creator of Dick Tracy?  Or John Byrne?  Arthur Adams?  George Perez?  Wendy Pini, of ''EQ''?  Mike Grell?  And the Canadian political cartoonist, Aislin?  Also, I noticed a strong Australian bias...  Was it because submissions were coming from there?  Also, how is it the hyperlinks for artists' names come here, and not to articles ''about'' them?  I already knew Dave Berg was a cartoonist when I clicked his name....  --squadfifteen, 18/10/05Alpha ListIf no one has any objections, I would like to alphabatize each list as they seem jumbled with names and delete the dead red links as this is an encyclopedia and a name without information is just a name. WayneRay 19:52, 6 May 2006 (UTC)WayneRay:A better way would be an alpha list nested under country headings. Alan Liefting 03:33, 9 October 2006 (UTC)Redundant?Surely this page is redundant now that there is a category system? If all cartoonists were listed it would be a LARGE page.Alan Liefting 03:33, 9 October 2006 (UTC):This guy has a point. Key (talk) 11:01, 13 April 2008 (UTC)::Ok, I stand corrected, I found this: Wikipedia:Categories%2C lists%2C and navigational templates. Key (talk) 11:06, 13 April 2008 (UTC)Red links removedI removed those entries that were only a red link. We need this list to be composed of blue links, otherwise there is no way at all to check that new names added are genuine. I alseo wrote a little bit of an intro. Before it had nothing. Invertzoo (talk) 18:35, 17 June 2013 (UTC)List organizationCurrent structure:#Notable cartoonists## Cartoonists in animation## Cartoonists of comic strips## Cartoonists of single-panel cartoons## Political cartoonists## Cartoonists of comic books### Cartoonists of action/superhero comic booksSeveral problems:*There are people under "notable cartoonists" (i.e. before "cartoonists in animation") -- but that's what the whole page is supposed to be.*Is there really a precedent to distinguish between "comic strips" and "single-panel cartoons"? Isn't this just a matter of how many sections a strip is divided into -- and aren't there a whole lot of comics that sometimes use a single panel and sometimes break it up? I know in terms of newspaper/magazine real estate there's a particular sort of look or position for reliably single-panel strips like The Far Side or Marmaduke; is this section just supposed to be for them (i.e. the more square-shaped ones)?*Political cartoonists and action/superhero comics stop breaking this list into medium and start talking about content. Why mention those and not all the other genres of comics and comic books?The sections that make sense are simply cartoonists notable for work in animation, for work in comic strips, and for work in comic books. Either that or by nationality.Thoughts? --;mdash; User:Rhododendrites|Rhododendrites talk;/tt; |00:06, 10 May 2014 (UTC)