UntitledThis work comes from an old public domain resource; fell free to expand, update, wikify, etc. --KQI will be having a go at this and ancillary pages over the coming weeks since I am in Aalborg atm Sjc 12:17, 23 Mar 2004 (UTC)----Regarding the text: ''Aalborg traces its history back over 1000 years, settled originally by the Vikings as a trading post because of its position on the Limfjord. The site of what were two Viking settlements, and a visible burial ground is to be seen on a hill overlooking the city, Lindholm Høje, and the size of these settlements emphasise the significance of this place as a crossing point.''Is there any written sources or archelogogy excavations showing vikings had anything with this trading post to do, and that there was a viking settlement? Is the word viking mentioned, or is this just a free speculation? Dan Koehl 11:50, 3 Dec 2004 (UTC): Excavations show that the burial site at Lindholm Høje was used from about 600 AD to 1000 AD. So it was certainly used by Vikings in the sense of Viking Age North Germanic people. I do not believe there are any signs of Vikings in the sense of raiders/pirates.: Rasmus (talk) 12:27, 3 Dec 2004 (UTC)::Hmmm. Are there any sources mentioning viking trade posts? Or, was it just "no-viking but viking age" trade posts? Is there any particulair point in making ''this town'' founded by vikings, if it wasnt, and more ''vikingish'' than the other hundreds of towns in scandinavia, if it was founded just by normal people living, fishing and trading there? Dan KoehlViking age is not same as vikings, and theres no source mentioning vikings founding Aahlborg, so I remove the sentence. Dan Koehl 13:57, 16 May 2005 (UTC)User:LinkBot/suggestions/Aalborg|Link suggestionsAn automated Wikipedia link suggester has some possible wiki link suggestions for the Aalborg article, and they have been placed on User:LinkBot/suggestions/Aalborg|this page for your convenience.''Tip:'' Some people find it helpful if these suggestions are shown on this talk page, rather than on another page. To do this, just add  to this page. ;mdash; LinkBot 00:55, 18 Dec 2004 (UTC): - I'm game. ''RichFarmbrough'', 07:35, 15 November 2010 (UTC).