Kevin GilbertDoes anyone have any evidence that the musician Kevin Gilbert died of this condition?  you may want to check out his article.--Mikepope 05:03, 2 June 2006 (UTC)VFD debateAfter the article was taken off the speedy deletion list, it was nominated for deletion in the regular VFD process. Wikipedia:Votes for deletion/Autoerotic asphyxiation|A archive of the debate is here. It was '''kept''' unanimously. Sjakkalle User talk:Sjakkalle|(Check!);10:03, 16 Jun 2005 (UTC)----"Autoerotic asphyxiation is the (usually) unintended death by strangulation while masturbating or sexual intercourse."  I removed "or sexual intercourse" b/c if one is engaged in sexual intercourse, that is, sexual activity with another person, then it's not ''autoerotic.''Information about this online is both scarce and repetitious.  seems to be one of the better sources so far.  has a paper by someone claiming to be a Ph.D.  According to him, the syndrome (?) (habit?) is not recognized by the APA or listed in DSM-IV, so that could explain the dearth of information on it.....He's right, it's not even listed under 302.9 Paraphilia not otherwise specified. --KQsorry KQ, you are right. I'm an idiot:-) WojPobI beg to differ.  Actually, no, I won't beg.  We all make mistakes; I've exceeded my quota here already.  :-) --KQWhoever added "or refute" to the sentence "no evidence was produced to support the claim" has failed to read the official coroner's reports for either death, both of which discount this as a cause of death. Kosinski even left a fairly pointed suicide note. That counts as a "refutation" in my book. Please do not present tabloid journalism as fact. - MBSo where should we find the official coroner's reports for each death?  --KQLink is already provided on hutchence page, quote on Kosinski page (haven't found the entire kosiski coroners report yet, only quotes)----2001-10-16, copying article from Leather Online. I hold the copyright and am releasing under GFDL. Edit, amend, Wikify as required --Dmerrill----Does anyone want to add to this entry details about what people do to try and prevent death? Like the lemon wedge in the mouth thing.Don't have time to check now, but are we sure it was mentioned in Hannibal ? My memory is that it cropped up in Silence of the Lambs, not Hannibal ?:Lemon wedge? Is this somehow related to the piece of orange allegedly in Stephen Milligan's mouth at the time of his death?:As a matter of curiosity, how could anyone imagine that a lemon wedge in one's mouth might prevent asphyxiation? Or is there something I'm missing here? -- The Anome 11:04, 16 November 2005 (UTC)"Does anyone want to add to this entry details about what people do to try and prevent death? Like the lemon wedge in the mouth thing."Funny how whoever posted that is remaining anonymous. Unfortunately experiments using various citrus fruits looking for a way to extend your own personal pleasure are considered original research and are against Wikipedia rules.--Nazrac 22:10, 3 August 2006 (UTC)NPOVToo much focus on death, e.g. "It is an extremely dangerous practice that results in many deaths each year." User:Njál|NjálI concur, this article is pathetically one-sided and does absolutely nothing to educate people about safe ways to asphxiate themselves. Wrath0fb0bIt's not supposed to tell people how to Asphyxiate themselves, safely or not. --Xdiabolicalx 17:00, 6 June 2006 (UTC)"While highly pleasurable, AEA is also an extremely dangerous practice that results in many accidental deaths each year."Does anyone else wonder how the author knows it is highly pleasurable? He hasnt cited his source and original research is against Wikipedia policy. *chuckles*--Nazrac 22:00, 3 August 2006 (UTC)No mention of Roy Hazelwood?I first read about this practice in ''The Evil That Men Do'' by Roy Hazelwood, an FBI profiler.  He did some writing on the subject that brought it to the attention of coroners and law enforcement.  Before Hazelwood came along, hangings were automatically written off as suicides.  Now, thanks to him, we get speculation about whether certain celebrities were masturbating with a noose around the neck or were actually trying to commit suicide. BrianGCrawfordMA 17:59, 26 February 2006 (UTC)Jerzy KosińskiI've removed the part about Jerzy Kosiński just before Michael Hutchence as on his own page it makes no mention of AA but says there is a suicide note, which you wouldn't do if you were performing AA would you? --Xdiabolicalx 17:05, 6 June 2006 (UTC)