31 August 2011;;Using Maternity patients as shieldsI am just curious as to the source for the statement in Chechnya's first war that they used maternity patients as shields.  Not being able to check the source, and being a little skeptical, I can't help but think it propaganda...germans cutting the breasts of nuns, etc.Please confirm the source, or put an advisory at the top of the page as having a slight lean against the Chechens.  Not that I feel that they are a great bunch of chaps, but I'd like to get the facts straight.Deleted "terror and deportation"I deleted "terror, deportation" from the sentence "systematic reconstruction, terror, deportation and rebuilding" in the header. Of course  there is terror and multiple HR abuses, but that sentence was completely illogical. If somebody wants to mention HR problems in the header - you are welcome to write a separate consistent sentence. I also do not understand what is that "deportation" that is referred to?Edit warI've protected this article for ten days due to continuing edit-warring. Please use this time to resolve your differences on this talk page.—User:Ezhiki|Ëzhiki (Igels Hérissonovich Ïzhakoff-Amursky)•(yo?); October3, 2013; 19:23 (UTC)Neutrality of the "Post-war reconstruction and insurgency" sectionThe "Post-war reconstruction and insurgency" section does really not seem NPOV. Statements such as "Kadyrov´s rule has been characterized by a terrible human rights record and a growing cult of personality" really seem to be pushing anti-Kadyrov and anti-Kremlin POV. Having statements such as "Kadyrov saved Chechnya from the evil terrorist CRI rule after Chechnya was incorporated again into Russia" here would be no more appropriate and neutral.--Special:Contributions/89.173.227.64|89.173.227.64 (talk) 16:11, 15 February 2016 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Chechnya. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;08:24, 27 February 2016 (UTC)