201511 june 2012Popup adsI wish there were a section talking about AOL's introduction of popup ads, the most infamous policy of its history next to refusing to cancel accounts.Brief History and PraiseBackground: modems connected two computers, not attatched to the internet, using telephone lines (now DSL). Bulletin Board Server BBS was a craze of home computers connecting to a bigger BBS sites having a large scsi disk drive, free software, user chat; often run by government or colleges.AOL made a chain market of this: buying BBS stations (small buildings with modems connected to PCs) to serve AOL customers. AOL later upgrade to internet connection with Netscape web browser (before Microsoft IE Browser existed). There was some competition by telephone company run ISDN, but limited. (telephone companies have always used small buildings similarly)But when Cable Internet came out: it was far faster and using government super-funded Cable Modem. All of those BBS stations filled Hayes modems and PCs? Technological paper weights (no easy upgrade path). Subscriptions fell.But AOL saw this and invested in cable tv companies and had it's own cable access brand as well. The "diving chart" above is wrong: it does not show people subscribed to cable services that AOL owns large shares in.AOL marketed (in wash dc area) by sending out free floppy disks that installed AOL software. People used these instead of buy floppies, and it was great advertisement. Thanks Steve!AOL was a boon to PC sales it let many "PC dummies" and experts experience connection with modems, who otherwise would not have had time or not have figured out how. AOL always had nice shared content (software, media, chat, mail, news groups) and was pleasant to see and use.The only AOL "criticism" was: during one period they limited where one could internet browse but only while connected to AOL. The policy was temporary.Proposed merge with Criticism of AOLWhy was this separated in the first place? Most of the content will be removed for bad or no sources, and it seems strange that the criticism is on its own page... User:AirCombat| '''A''';/big;ir  ♠;/big;  '''C''';/big;ombat User_talk:AirCombat|What'sup, dog?;17:56, 6 November 2015 (UTC):I believe that criticism can be defined as an expression of disapproval of something based on perceived faults. I hope Wikipedia would be a source for information instead of an editorial platform for opinion and hyperbole. I would like to see factual information free of bias.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Zyippee (talk • Special:Contributions/Zyippee|contribs) 02:33, 10 November 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:I personally believe that the article "Criticism of AOL" should be merged with the article "AOL"  Dinnypaul (talk) 15:48, 11 November 2015 (UTC):I didn't read through all of the criticism, but note the "walled garden" part in the lead of that page. I was just looking at the lead (of an old version of this page): "AOL is best known for its online software suite, also called ''AOL''". This used to be the case, I'm not sure the younger generation will remember this.. And since then, the company was bought and spun off, then bought again.. I haven't followed AOLs history, if it is "just" a "media" company now, then I think criticism belongs if it applies to the current business. comp.arch (talk) 14:09, 11 February 2016 (UTC):'''Support'''. Cut out the unsourced or improperly sourced material (which sounds like bad personal griping), and there's just not enough for an actual article. oknazevad (talk) 16:00, 14 February 2016 (UTC)Based in New Jersey?The summary says AOL is based in NJ, but that's the only mention of that location, and the rest of the article either mentions Virginia or NYC. Is that an error?Alaphona (talk) 04:38, 1 March 2016 (UTC)