On the introductionI think that in this article basics should be included for beginners.Link:logarithms,Euclidean vectorsEtymology and  True Word OriginsIt is obvious the editor of this article has control issues.It is a fact that al-Khwārizmī studied Greek source material extensively to make his unique contribution to the world of mathematics.It is a fact that most of the word ''algorithm'' just as word the ''logarithm'' come from a Greek language origin.To state that two syllables of a word come from a certain language (in this case Greek and NOT Arabic) and then refuse to give credit, shows true ignorance, ethnic bias and revisionism.It is in fact important to begin to understand any concept by beginning with where the notion comes from and what it means, this is fundamental.Since "al" is a reference to the name Khwārizmī and not part of the name or ''nomen'' itself, then there is no evidence that this is related to the etymology of the word ''algorithm'' and not irrelevant to the issue.  The word 'the' or 'of' have no contextual or descriptive relationship to the entire word, al-gorithm.It is widely accept that ''logarithm'' is short for the Greek ''logos-arthimos'' or literally translated "why-arithmetic" and most evidence supports the idea that ''algorithm'' is a further development of the same arithmetic concept ''allo-logos-arthimos'' or translated from the Greek: "another-why-arithmetic".: "Most evidence"? Where? Yours appears to be a false etymology, even though it's a reasonable mistake to make. See this for example:ALGORITHM. n. 1690s, from French algorithme, refashioned (under mistaken connection with Greek arithmos "number") from Old Frenchalgorisme "the Arabic numeral system" (13c.), from Medieval Latin algorismus, a mangled transliteration of Arabic al-Khwarizmi"native of Khwarazm," surname of the mathematician whose works introduced sophisticated mathematics to the West (see algebra ).The earlier form in Middle English was algorism (early 13c.), from Old French.;/pre;: Source: Online Etymology Dictionary. Special:Contributions/200.127.158.54|200.127.158.54 (talk) 21:26, 1 October 2015 (UTC)al-Khwārizmī developed the algorithm from reference to Greek math texts, not in a vacuum, but by study of preexisting knowledge and he innovated from that point.  This has nothing to do with opinions it is "the story", historical fact.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/69.183.30.237|69.183.30.237 (talk) 06:41, 8 May 2012 (UTC);; ;;:You are certainly full of opinions (or as Bertrand Russell would call them --  "beliefs"), but you have not backed them up with even a single source. Wikipedia requires sources, not beliefs. If you have credible sources, in particular research on the etymology of this particular word ''algorithm'', we would like to see them. Bill Wvbailey (talk) 14:40, 8 May 2012 (UTC)There are sources in the article itself, an article which has contradictions.  Some related articles that conflict are also found.  The use of language fragments or combined words means that it is already proven. Arabic and Greek merging of words is common throughout history, there is a shared influence from Egypt and the Phoenician root.  The close trading relationship between these cultures translated into intellectual exchange as well.  The alphabet was created from a Phoenician arithmetic notation of items of trade, ie. Ox-head or alpha etc.  The Greeks combined these symbols with there own glyph-ic scripts and writing was also adopted in more widely in the mid east.  Arabic followed a similar genesis preceding written script.The article itself is not consistent and was revised to remove pertinent information.  I don't agree that any "belief" system enters into the debate.  History at one point in time became an instrument to convey knowledge as imperfect as that can be.  Politicizing something that can be clearly pointed out does not accomplish anything.  It is not belief that leads me to think this, it is disdain for a new culture that has disregard for the past.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/69.182.147.217|69.182.147.217 (talk) 04:36, 11 May 2012 (UTC);; ;;:Etymology: ''algorithm''. Sources? BillWvbailey (talk) 23:00, 11 May 2012 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Algorithm. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive toCheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;17:53, 13 July 2015 (UTC)first paragraph covering Euclid'sI improved the section covering Euclid's algorithm by mentioning that it's to determine the greatest common divisor. See  A good understanding of English and language in general will tell you that even though the usual use of adjectives is that you put it before the noun that it demonstrates, when the demonstrative (is ''predicate'' a better word?) is more a phrase than a single word--in this case, "common to two numbers"--it makes it easier to parse to put the adjectival phrase after the noun. user:98.229.184.161 disagrees, and made this edit with the claim that my usage was invalid. See  On the other hand, now the wording is "greatest common divisor (GCD) to two numbers" which, to me, seems very clunky. I would edit it back to return it to my wording, but I don't feel like starting an edit war over something so simple. I'll leave it to the rest of the community to decide. D. F. Schmidt (talk) 21:48, 14 December 2015 (UTC)Word origin and EtymologyThere are two sections ("word origin" and "etymology") in article about one and the same topic. I think these sections need to merge. --Treisijs (talk) 14:37, 21 December 2015 (UTC)