External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20100124150357/to *Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers. —User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:48, 25 August 2015 (UTC)Hey, Some of these links are dead. Just thought you might want to know. MagmaBit (talk) 00:00, 3 December 2015 (UTC)Animals in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsAnimals in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, currently a redirect to Beliefs and practices of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has been nominated at redirects for discussion (RfD). The redirect has a complex history and the discussion would benefit from the input of editors with relevant subject knowledge. Please comment at Wikipedia:Redirects for discussion/Log/2015 September 8#Animals in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Thryduulf (talk) 22:19, 10 September 2015 (UTC)News and directions from 2015 October ConferenceFor the editors who are interested, there are notes and links on my personal TALK page:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:Charles_Edwin_Shipp#LDS_October_Conference.2C_world_broadcast.2C_October_3-4.2C_2015_.28Sat.2FSun.2C_10am.2F2pm_MT.29My favorate link is to "notable quotes" with artful pictures from the Provo, Utah, newspaper:The message of the newly called, set apart, and sustained Apostles of the Quorum of the Twelve was to ''serve the individual and the needy throughout the world''. Enjoy; see what you think. -- Charles Edwin Shipp (talk) 04:41, 4 October 2015 (UTC)::I've added links and information and my NOTES are ready for your review (and use in any WP Article editing.) -- Charles Edwin Shipp (talk) 02:18, 5 October 2015 (UTC)----Correction to "the LDS Church or, informally, the Mormon Church"Hi, with all due respect, I feel like the line "The LDS church, or informally, The Mormon Church" should have the latter part removed, becoming ("The LDS Church"). The official title of the church is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or the LDS church for short, but "Mormon" is a title used when referring informally to members of the church, not the church in question. The church is named after Jesus Christ, not after Mormon, and so it should be referred to as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, not the Mormon church. Thanks!!Special:Contributions/205.118.81.24|205.118.81.24 (talk) 01:45, 5 December 2015 (UTC):While it may not be the preferred informal term by the church, the term is nonetheless used by the general public. The average person who says ''Mormons'' is referring to the church and not to the members collectively. —'''C.Fred''' (talk) 02:07, 5 December 2015 (UTC)Non-Trinitarian doctrineThe LDS differs from mainstream Christianity in a number of ways. Perhaps the most fundamental is that it is non-Trinitarian (and technically not even monotheistic, believing that God, Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit are three separate Gods). This doctrinal difference is critical, and I would have thought that it would have been mentioned in the article. At the moment there are only the vague references to mainstream Churches not accepting that the LDS are Christians.Royalcourtier (talk) 23:47, 22 December 2015 (UTC): -- Do a 'FIND' in the article (ctrl-F) on the term 'separate' and you will see five occurances. The first address your excellent point: "From the perspective of Christians who agree with creeds, the most significant area of departure is the rejection by the LDS Church of certain parts of ecumenical creeds such as the Nicene Creed, which defines the predominant view of the Christian God as a Trinity of three separate persons in "one essence". LDS Church theology includes the belief in a "Godhead" composed of God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost as three separate Persons who share a unity of purpose or will; however, they are viewed as three distinct Beings making one Godhead." And the last ref. is an abbreviated version saying the same thing.  Hope This Helps, Charles Edwin Shipp (talk) 23:54, 22 December 2015 (UTC)