'Audio'Audio signal processing is not quite the same thing as just 'audio' (see for example Vinyl record), but the old page of Audio described it like it was exactly the same thing Audio signal processing. If you have some real content for Audio, please remove the redirect and do a new page :) --Tbackstr:Actually, I think 'audio' is an adjective and shouldn't be used without a substantive, like 'audio equipment'. In that case, audio really shouldn't have a separate page. --Tbackstrx  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/182.19.70.83|182.19.70.83 (talk) 07:10, 5 August 2013 (UTC);; ;;nice onei'd just like to say, what a great page. s'all. rogNot a telecommunications stubI agree that this is a stub, but it's not about telecoms. Can't find a more appropriate stub category though. —The preceding unsigned comment was added by JanCeuleers (talk • Special:Contributions/JanCeuleers|contribs) {}.;:Indeed. Somehow there are no stubs at all for engineering topics. I am thinking of organizing a new stub category for electrical engineering. --Zvika 08:43, 8 June 2006 (UTC)::There is  (:Category:Electronics stubs).  This category is large enough (between 500 and 600) to accomodate a split if a sub-topic of electrical engineering would be appropriate, though that subordination would likely to draw some criticism based on a lack of full consensus on the exact meaning of 'electrical engineering'.  The  (:Category:Telecommunications stubs) is already a sub-category of this category. User:Ceyockey (''talk to me'';) 11:21, 8 June 2006 (UTC):::IMO, neither electrical engineering nor telecom is a sub-category of electronics. Electronics deals with hardware, and many electrical engineers (myself included) deal entirely with software, or even with the theory behind the software. I think there should be an EE-stub category, in which signal processing stubs and telecom stubs would both be sub-categories. Compare :Category:Electrical engineering and :Category:Signal processing which is a sub-category. --Zvika 16:51, 12 June 2006 (UTC)::::Not all telecommunications-related topics (and therefore not all com-stubs) are to do with technology. There are many other aspects to telecommunications, including economics, regulations, services, etc. Sorry to be adding to the problem. JanCeuleers 17:25, 12 June 2006 (UTC)Article improvementsThe original article does not explain the concept of audio signal processing. I introduce the classical concepts of audio compressor, expander and limiters, slope, attack /release time, etcThe broadcast processors section gives the WIKI readers the last information about the technology behind the concepts of loudness and improving FM coverage.--Albert-Kraft (talk) 23:52, 21 March 2009 (UTC):I have reverted the material, because it was yet another blatant attempt to promote the work of Oscar Bonello (he was referenced 4 times in your addition).  You have already been warned about this, so please stop!  Oli Filth(talk|Special:Contributions/Oli_Filth|contribs) 00:09, 22 March 2009 (UTC)ApplicationsUnder the Applications tab , it is mentioned as"Processing methods and application areas include storage, level compression, data compression, transmission, enhancement (e.g., equalization, filtering, noise cancellation, echo or reverb removal or addition, etc.)"  One important field of voice to Text conversions and other such related fields has been missed here. shouldn't we add them ???Ap aravind (talk) 06:19, 27 July 2009 (UTC)Extraneous and erroneous materialThe entire "History" section is unnecessary and misleading.All it does is explain what an audio signal is, in a simplistic and incorrect way at that, before tagging a random sentence about how the entire concept was important in early radio broadcasting. I propose its deletion; the single relevant sentence can be moved to the introduction paragraph if it is considered useful.Further, the section on analog signals is mismatched with that for digital signals. An article already exists for both analog signal processing and analog signals themselves: why is this not linked? The syntactical structure of the description is also very confusing and disjointed, e.g. "is usually a continuous, non-discrete, electrical." An electrical ''what''?I note that in both of these sections an editor has also placed a link to their userpage as some form of signature. This will be removed immediately.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/121.72.148.123|121.72.148.123 (talk) 04:11, 20 October 2011 (UTC);; ;;