Old stuffHow is the Cessna a sub-heading of the bird? SkyDot 19:13, 30 October 2006 (UTC)*''The consistency of the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals can not be proved under ZFC.''**Is that correct? I thought the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals can (provably) not be proved, while it is open whether their non-existence can be proved.  In other words, "the consistency of the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals" has not yet been proved while the consistency of their non-existence has been proved.:::Yes, your version is correct. That existence of inacc. cardinals cannot be proved is a direct consequence of the 2nd incompleteness theorem (one observes that the set of all sets with rank less than that of an inacc. cardinal form a model of ZFC). Incidentally, wouldn't it be better to have the main article at Cardinal number? "Cardinal" has a pretty well-defined religious meaning as well, and "cardinal number" is not outdated.::::not to mention the bird.  And the baseball team.--MichaelTinkler:::::Ok, I'm convinced. Cardinal number it is. --AxelBoldt:::::::As this refers to a subdivision/less obvious definition of the term, could it be emphasised that it is the number that is being referred to, not a religious person being away from their phone (g). Jackiespeel 18:08, 9 January 2006 (UTC)Deleting Mike Cline ContributionsI am deleting or reverting any contributions I have previously made to this article for the following reason.  I work for a company that practices and teaches Strategic Planning methodologies thus making my contribution to any article related to Strategy topics a conflict of interest an in violation of Wikipedia Conflict of Interest guidelines WP:COI --Mike Cline 13:25, 4 February 2007 (UTC)Cardinal is also a popular swiss beer brand, should I add it?RevertAnon. IP removed a link with no explanation.  I reverted. -- SECisek 01:25, 4 October 2007 (UTC)Requested moveCardinal → Cardinal (disambiguation) — We should really give the main article to what is now Cardinal (Catholicism).  A look at "what links here" shows this is overwhemingly the main use involved. The mathmatical use is at Cardinal number, ; if there were a predominant sports team using the term they could have "Cardinals" (I don't have a view on that).  Few people can really link to "Cardinal" when they mean "cardinal bird", and the other uses are minor.  This page should herefore become "Cardinal (disambiguation)" —Johnbod 20:05, 2 December 2007 (UTC)Please centralize voting and discussion at the survey at Talk:Cardinal_%28Catholicism%29#Requested_move  Johnbod 23:37, 2 December 2007 (UTC):''A move proposal for this page was listed at Wikipedia:Requested moves, but there was no consensus found for the move. DekimasuUser talk:Dekimasu|よ!;;/font; 00:34, 7 December 2007 (UTC) ''Passenger Train EntryThe passenger train entry reads “''Cardinal'' (passenger train), an Amtrak route connecting Chicago with New York via Cincinnati and Washington” -- it mentions Cincinnati and Washington to avoid confusion with Amtrak’s other Chicago-New York routes:* ''Lake Shore Limited'' (18h 45m)* ''Pennsylvanian'' and ''Capitol Limited'' (19h)* ''Regional Service'' and ''Capitol Limited'' (21h)For reference purposes, note that the ''Cardinal'' service is 28h 50m.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/69.205.54.39|69.205.54.39 (talk) 13:15, 28 May 2008 (UTC);;; ;;