ReferencesFaroe IslandsI believed that they, along with the Orkneys and Shetlands, were geographically a part of the British Isles? RailwayScientist (talk) (formerly Mistoop)  —Preceding undated comment added 19:15, 1 September 2015 (UTC);; ;;:Do you have any sources that support your belief?   The phrase "geographically a part of the British Isles" is something of a nonsense.  The British Isles are determined by convention and culture, more than pure physical geography - hence, the conventional inclusion of the Channel Islands.  Ghmyrtle (talk) 19:19, 1 September 2015 (UTC):PS:  shows that the question has been discussed, and hopefully answered, previously.  Ghmyrtle (talk) 19:20, 1 September 2015 (UTC):The geographical explanation is pretty simple: there is a significant trough separating the Faroe Plateau from the rest of the European continental shelf. But like Ghmyrtle points out, the "archipelago" isn't really defined geographically anyway as it includes islands that are on France's bank of the English Channel. Rob984 (talk) 22:45, 1 September 2015 (UTC):Illustration: :File:BLANK in Europe (relief) (-mini map).svg Rob984 (talk) 22:59, 1 September 2015 (UTC)::I think that the term "British Isles" pre-dates any understanding of the depth of the sea - so, I'm not sure how relevant that point really is.  Ghmyrtle (talk) 08:08, 2 September 2015 (UTC)The map “Subdivisions of the British Isles” and headed “Terminology of the British Isles”The map “Subdivisions of the British Isles” and headed “Terminology of the British Isles” is potentially a very good visual representation of some occasionally not obvious concepts. Unfortunately it appears to include omissions, errors and confuse geographic and political names.1. There used to exist a “Kingdom of Great Britain” in the 18th century but it there is no such thing any more. The term “Great Britain” is now only a geographic term being the geographic name for the largest island of the archipelago. As such it does not include any surrounding islands such as the Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland, Anglesey or the Isle of Wight. The area described by the red line marked “Great Britain” is neither a political nor a geographic entity. It is an incorrect use of the name of a real but other geographic entity.;/p;2. There is a name “United Kingdom” underlined in yellow which correctly corresponds to the area enclosed by the yellow line. The Isle of Man and Channel Islands are also correctly encircled. There is a name “Republic of Ireland” underlined in green with no corresponding green boundary line. Finally, there is an off-green-purple coloured line enclosing the entire island of Ireland with no corresponding name. Is this two errors, a single erroneous conflation of politics and geography, a political aspiration or something else? As I understand it, none of these things belong on these pages. ;/p;3. The name “British Isles” at the top is confusing. It is coloured mid-blue but is not associated with a corresponding boundary. It is also coloured similarly to other political entities on the map while it is not a political entity but a geographic name on a political map. I note that it was originally associated with a corresponding boundary on an earlier version of this map.This map contains factually inaccuracies and is additionally confusing. PeterColdridge (talk) 16:09, 19 October 2015 (UTC);/p;4. The two most prominently named areas are identified as “Great Britain” and “Ireland”. Neither of these areas exist as jurisdictions. The island of Ireland is divided between two jurisdictions. The Republic of Ireland's jurisdiction does not extend into Northern Ireland. Northern Ireland's jurisdiction does not extend into the Republic of Ireland. There is simply no such jurisdiction defined, even loosely, by the island of Great Britain or the area of the 18th century Kingdom of Great Britain or the area within the red line. It does not exist. ;/p;5. As a matter of clarity, it is not clear why, alongside these prominently named areas, that are not jurisdictions, are the entities of “United Kingdom” and “Republic of Ireland” that are jurisdictions, but are identified in half sized fonts. Other real jurisdictions, the Isle of Man and the Channel Island jurisdictions are allocated even smaller fonts. This is confusing. ;/p;6. On a more serious note, actual and important jurisdictions are entirely missed out. The Scottish Parliament, the devolved national legislature of Scotland has legislative competence over Scotland. Why is this jurisdiction of 5.3 million people not identified on the map? The National Assembly for Wales is the devolved assembly with power to make legislation in Wales. Why is this jurisdiction of 3.1 million people not identified on the map? The Northern Ireland Assembly is the devolved legislature of Northern Ireland and has power to legislate over the Northern Ireland. Why is this jurisdiction of 1.9 million people not identified on the map? The London Assembly alongside the Mayor of London has devolved legislative jurisdiction over London. This jurisdiction of 8 million people does not even exist on this map. One may point out, as a matter of fact, that these omissions compare with the maximum prominence offered the Republic of Ireland, a jurisdiction of 4.6 million people. There appears to be a question of balance here. ;/p;I recognise and respect the need for moderation in these pages but I feel I must express the opinion that on the basis of the facts contained in this map, this map contains serious factually inaccuracies, serious omissions, is misleading, is questionably balanced and is additionally confusing. ;/p; PeterColdridge (talk) 22:42, 19 October 2015 (UTC):# The term "Great Britain" is now ''not'' "only a geographic term".  It is also a political term, meaning England + Scotland + Wales, ''including'' their surrounding islands (I of Wight, Shetland, Anglesey, etc.)  Hence, "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland".  So, the map is correct.:# The grey line encircles the island of Ireland - that is, the republic + Northern Ireland.  I do not see what is confusing in that.:# The title at the top refers to all the entities on the map.  Again, I do not see what is confusing.::Ghmyrtle (talk) 16:35, 19 October 2015 (UTC):::: 1. There are those who conceive or advocate the concept of a “political term” of a “Great Britain” meaning the UK minus Northern Ireland. There are those who conceive or advocate a Republic of Ireland having jurisdictional control of all of the island of Ireland. Such an aspiration may be so noted as a matter of fact and may also be visually described on such as this map. What is not to be expected is that every nation that has a territorial claim made against it is obliged to create a judicial entity that mirrors every territorial claim made against it. Imagine the South China Sea. It would be laughable. The UK has not created a political entity called “Great Britain”. It does not exist. As for the name it is the standard convention to accept the endonym. The UK endonym “Great Britain” means the largest island of the archipelago. You might advocate changing this standard convention. You might for instance berate the Italians for the temerity of calling their city Firenze. Otherwise you accept the endonym. The endonym is the name of the island. I repeat. In the UK there is no political entity called “Great Britain”. There is no concept of a “Great Britain” as anything other than an island. It does not exist. If you want to note on the map the territorial claim do so. But do not try to pretend there is a political entity called “Great Britain”.:::: Your assertions suggest that a name, in this case, "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" defines or describes the geographical area claimed by the state. This is clearly untrue. Do you think that by calling their state the “United Stares of America” they are claiming all of the continents of North and South America? Do you thing that they are defining the continent as the area under the state's jurisdiction? Manifestly untrue. Do you expect the UK to call itself the "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Hebrides and the Orkney Isles and the Shetland Isles and Anglesey and the Isle of Wight and … and …"? A state can call itself anything it likes. The UK calls itself the "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland". It's a name. It is not an inclusive definition of a territorial claim.:::: 2. There is no line that circumscribes the jurisdiction of the Republic of Ireland. Why not? This is a serious error. You assert that “the map is correct” after I have pointed out the errors. Do you seriously think that, after careful consideration, the jurisdiction of the Republic of Ireland either does not exist or does not deserve to be identified?:::: You say “I do not see what is confusing”. The name of a jurisdiction, the “Republic of Ireland”, is placed inside a line enclosing a geographic entity over which it does not have jurisdiction. I am sure if you have another think you will see why this is confusing. PeterColdridge (talk) 23:05, 20 October 2015 (UTC)::::::Your first point, from which most of your other concerns seem to stem, is, quite simply, factually wrong.  The term "Great Britain" means, in one definition, the combined area of England, Scotland and Wales, including their surrounding islands.  It was created in 1707 by the union of England (then including Wales, and surrounding islands) and Scotland (including its surrounding islands), and subsequent legislation has not changed that basic fact.  Here are two clear definitions - , .  Ghmyrtle (talk) 08:32, 21 October 2015 (UTC):::::::Great Britain and Terminology of the British Isles disagree with you. "Great Britain" refers only to the main island. Peter Coldridge's criticisms are correct. --Florian Blaschke (talk) 21:22, 7 February 2016 (UTC)::::::::Great Britain does not ''only'' refer to the island.  It has two very similar but slightly distinct meanings: (1) the main island; (2) the combination of England, Scotland and Wales.  The name "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" clearly does not exclude those small islands close to the main island, such as the Isle of Wight, Anglesey, and Shetland.   Ghmyrtle (talk) 21:51, 7 February 2016 (UTC):::::::::Source? Your repeated argument using the name "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland" is fallacious, as the name is just conventional and it would be cumbersome to enumerate all those islands; it is cumbersome enough already. As pointed out somewhere before, countries can call themselves whatever they want, regardless of whether it is strictly correct or satisfying to geography pedants. Clearly, you've never heard of "pars pro toto". --Florian Blaschke (talk) 23:24, 7 February 2016 (UTC):::Whilst the map is by on largely unproblematic, it isn't clear enough on what line means what. You have large writing for the names Ireland and Great Britain, both directly attached to their respective line, however have no names attached directly for the other lines. Are people meant to guess? Like what is the purple line for for those who know little? Mabuska (talk) 21:32, 19 October 2015 (UTC)::::# Not sure I agree with Ghmyrtle on 1. This could be confusing. Technically the red line does capture political entities that would be attached to 'Great Britain', but only in contrast to 'Northern Ireland' in the title of the UK. I can't think of any other reason one would want to differentiate. Given that this is a geographical article I think it would be more helpful to the uninformed reader if the red line matched the coast line of the island of Great Britain. The yellow line already captures the constituent parts of the UK.::::# Agree with Ghmyrtle. The colours don't quite match, but I'm sure that could be corrected quite easily - presumably to emerald rather than grey... And as Mabuska says, the other lines should be attached to the titles to which they correspond.:::::::Wiki-Ed, may I invite you to read my point 2 above dated 23:05, 20 October 2015. PeterColdridge (talk) 07:59, 21 October 2015 (UTC)::::# Agree with Ghmyrtle. The map displays political and geographical entities.::::HOWEVER, answer me this: why are Yell and Unst part of the British Islands, but not the United Kingdom? What have they done to deserve this? Wiki-Ed (talk) 21:48, 19 October 2015 (UTC):::::It's schematic. What about Rockall? (Don't answer that....);Ghmyrtle (talk) 07:09, 20 October 2015 (UTC)Where is the Republic of Ireland?Republic of Ireland is a description of the state that has jurisdiction over 26 of the counties of the island of Ireland.  It is not the name of that state.  The name of the state is "Éire, or in the English language Ireland".Special:Contributions/2602:301:77C6:8E80:494:634B:298E:AA96|2602:301:77C6:8E80:494:634B:298E:AA96 (talk) 06:46, 13 January 2016 (UTC):Agree with you, but this has been done to death in the past and there is no consensus to change the name.  We should use Ireland ----User:Snowded|'''Snowded''';/font; User talk:Snowded#top|TALK;/font;;08:52, 13 January 2016 (UTC)::I also agree, but this is not the place to discuss it. The right place used to be (still useful as a reference) Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Ireland-related articles/Ireland disambiguation task force and is now WP:IECOLL / WT:IECOLL. User:Waggers|W;/b;a;/b;g;/b;ge;/b;r;/b;s;/b;User talk:Waggers|''TALK'';13:56, 13 January 2016 (UTC)Britain and IrelandThanks for your message. Of course the Irish are a distinct people. I wasn't questioning that. But at some time they were not a unified people populating what became 'Ireland'. Because of the controversies in this article I am merely asking for you to provide a source about the statement that the 'Irish' as a distinct group populated the islands along with the Anglo Saxons (and many other tribes or peoples) during this period. My understanding is that what became to be called the 'Irish' people were already present in Ireland prior to the Roman occupation of 'England' and therefore prior to the various migrations of people after the Romans left. It will help prevent others reverting your edits if you provide sources when editing controversial articles. It is probably better to take any further discussion or reasons for your edits to the articles talk page rather than each of ours. Robynthehode (talk) 21:07, 24 February 2016 (UTC)* Hello Robyn. I'm not claiming the Irish were a unified people at the time (or now!). I did say 'a distinct people' but 'peoples' would have being better, just like the British. Various Irish groups raided, invaded, and settled in Britain before, during, and after the era the various Anglo-Saxon folks came to Britain. The Great Conspiracy of 367-368 included groups the Romans termed, in Latin, as ''Picti'' (from Alba - that is, Britain north of the Wall), ''Scotti'' (a generic term simply denoting group(s) from Ireland), ''Attacotti'' (origin uncertain; possibly from Ireland, but certainly outside Roman Britain), ''Saxones'', and ''Franci''. However, groups from Ireland had being raiding, invading, and settling in Britain since the late 200s. Roman sources identify them as ''Hiberni'' in AD 297, and as ''Scotti'' in AD 314 (NHI, vol. III, cited in full below). This pre-dates similar Anglo-Saxon activities, but as the Great Conspiracy demonstrated, the Irish sometimes acted with them. Irish settlements were all along the coast of Roman Britain, apparently up the Severn, into the west country, and north of the Wall in Alba (hence Scotland). My sources are ''A New History of Ireland'' vol. VIII, 1982 (2002 reprint), p. 15; and Phillip Rance's "Epiphanius of Salamis and the Scotti: new evidence for late Roman-Irish relations", ''Britannia'' 43, 2012, p. 228, 229. See also Rance's "Attacotti, Déisi and Magnus Maximus: the Case for Irish Federates in Late Roman Britain", ''Britannia'' 32, 2001, pp. 243-270. Both of these articles are available online on Rance's academia.edu page. See also Uí Liatháin, Brychan, etymology of Llŷn Peninsula,  Eóganachta, Ogham, Silchester Ogham stone. I am certainly not trying to provoke controversy and I apologise if I gave you that impression; all I am trying to do is add a dimension that is historic yet often under- or unaddressed in this subject. If having read my citations and agree with what I wrote based on them, please do add the information. Is mise, Fergananim (talk) 18:00, 25 February 2016 (UTC): Thanks Fergananim I am happy for you to include relevant text supported by reliable sources. My initial revert was based on the fact the text in your edit did not seem to be supported by the quote you provided. And similarly my point above about an 'Irish' people already present in 'Ireland' prior to any other peoples that may be called 'Irish' arriving in Ireland after the Romans left. You just have to be careful that any sources you use DO support the text you write in the article. My comment about controversy was just that the article is often boldly edited by people who do not support their additions to the article with reliable sources or by reaching consensus for change on this talk page. The article should certainly show information supported by reliable sources for all the notable views of the political and social history of the peoples of these islands within the limitations of this articles parameters. I am no expert so maybe others can comment on your sources and your proposed additions Robynthehode (talk) 21:36, 25 February 2016 (UTC): Fair points, Robynthehode. While I base my edits on knowledge of good reliable sources, I don't always link them as well as I should. Can I ask you to clarify what you mean by 'Irish', 'Ireland'? Fergananim (talk) 19:17, 26 February 2016 (UTC)