AlabamaSweet Home Alabama?this article shood have the song Sweet Home Alabama in the article.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Jgsho (talk • Special:Contributions/Jgsho|contribs) 00:38, 11 October 2011 (UTC);;; ;;: Why?Chagallophile (talk) 18:48, 17 March 2013 (UTC): Where is the culture ? Songs, artists, literature and so on ? Gujjo (talk) 17:41, 6 October 2013 (UTC)Improvements to offerI did some sprucing of this article as some improvement I'm trying to do to US state and related articles. This article is pretty good and thorough, with no obvious glaring issues, but there are means of improvement. I'm just suggesting these as a general recommendation that anyone, including myself, may consider adding.1. The article seems to lack a characterization of the people of the state, which I see in other similar articles. It talks a lot about the state's famous history, but it lacks a more modern Culture section like most states have. A Culture section made by those familiar with the state would help talk about the population beyond just demographics.2. The History section ends abruptly after the 1960s. I know not much has happened of significance since, but it might be useful to follow up and perhaps explain briefly how racial issues have evolved since or mention other events.3. The Economic section doesn't talk at all about poverty, wages and wage gaps, or social security, which seems like information any state should have. The healthcare section is also rather short; a mention of health insurance figures in Alabama might help.4. A lot of states have tables listing how the state voted in presidential elections. Alabama is missing this, and I think it would prove useful, especially when the Law section describes Alabama's shift from Democratic to a Republican stronghold. Scarlettail (talk) 18:41, 29 April 2014 (UTC)SportsFnlayson I wanted to share some ideas on how to improving the sports section. I propose adding some text discussing the popularity and success of its college football teams (I had begun adding some text along those lines, but you removed it). I think it's also worth mentioning in text that Alabama does not have any major league sports teams.I had some other ideas re reorganization and trimming, but we can put those aside for now. It's clear from your revert and edit summary that you took issue with my changes. If you would explain further what your main objections were, I'm optimistic we can quickly reach consensus on how to improve this section. Thanks. Barryjjoyce (talk) 01:17, 20 August 2014 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Alabama. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive *Added archive toCheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;17:24, 13 July 2015 (UTC)Dothan, Alabama Cops Accused Of Mass False Arrests Of BlacksThere will be some interesting facts to add to Dothan and Alabama history as the events detailed on sites such as the following develop:https://www.popularresistance.org/rural-alabama-cops-accused-of-mass-false-arrests-of-blacks/  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Kaecyy (talk • Special:Contributions/Kaecyy|contribs) 08:54, 8 December 2015 (UTC);;; ;;