Apples in the BibleSomebody deleted a reference to the appearance of apples in the Bible because they stated it was wrong.  While I don't know the Bible well enough to be sure whether this deletion was correct or not, if it is, wouldn't the fact that the popular mythology is wrong be in itself worthy of mention?BTW, I love the name of this page :)----I've read one reason the apple plays such a prominent role in myth is that the roundness of the apple is suggestive of the mons veneris.  This ties in with the story of Eve offering Adam an apple.----This needs more work, with additional history. I'll try to get to it soon. (Want to add Johnny Appleseed, and apples in Greek myth, at a minimum, and some reorganization would help.) Vicki Rosenzweig----How about the health benefits of apples: Vitamin C, fiber, antioxidants (I'm pretty sure they have them). Any experts to expand on this?I know it might be a bit "anal" of me but I'm thinking perhaps the picture showing a variety of different types of apple might have been the better choice Mintguy:''Not anal at all- if I get the chance I'd love to do a whole sub-project on the different varieties of apple, including including pictures (if I could find royalty free images)- a personal enthusiasm of mine- in the UK there used to be over 6000 apple varieties, mainly very locally distinctive. The national (UK) apple collection at Brogdale in Kent holds around 2500 varieties. I'ts a fascinating place... Nowadays only some 6 or 7 varieties, mainly imported, are available to buy... Perhaps not the biggest crisis the world is currently facing, but symptomatic and symbolic of the erosion of diversity and triumph of uniformity...quercus robur (getting off soapbox...)'':Change it then.  I chose this one because you could get an idea of the apple's shape.  The other one was overhead, didn't tell me much.  If I didn't know what it was beforehand I wouldn't have known after.  A picture showing several varieties, giving a good idea of the apple's shape, would be great.  --KQ::The apple pie one works ok for that, though it's drenched in U.S. patriotism.  :-/  --KQ:::Who doesn't know what an apple is? :) --taras::::Someone, obviously, else there's no need for an article.  :-)  --KQ:::: Err... how about someone in somewhere like Mozambique! (someone will probably tell me they've got a thriving apple industry now) Mintguy 20:44 Dec 19, 2002 (UTC)::::: The only kind of apple that flourishes in Mozambique is the Cashew Apple, which is [related to the cashew nut]...:::::: Well there you go! What if some bloke in Mozambique had said ''"Who doesn't know what a cashew apple is? We don't need a picture of one!"'' incidentally it's not related to the cashew nut it grows on the tree from which cashews are harvested. MintguyAny truth to the story that, though the apple is the legendary fruit of Eden, that it didn't grow in the Tigris-Euphrates region and therefore it's been thought to have been an apricot?  I don't really know the details of this.  -- Zoe:I swear I've heard it was the kiwi.  Strange theory, since the geography isn't quite right, I think, but I'm pretty sure I read it somewhere as an archaic theory. Tuf-Kat*The idea that the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil was an apple may have arisen as a play on words in Christian western Europe because in Latin ''mălum'' means "something bad or evil" and ''mālum'' means "apple" Anthony Appleyard (talk) 16:21, 12 August 2008 (UTC)Old cut-and-paste moves affecting this page*''See Talk:Apple#Old cut-and-paste moves affecting this page for information.'' Anthony Appleyard (talk) 16:14, 12 August 2008 (UTC)**Fixed. See my . '''Graham'''87;/font; 12:03, 22 August 2008 (UTC)