__FORCETOC__Merger proposal: the keystone metaphorI suggest that the (very short) page Keystone symbol in Mormonism should be merged into this article. I really want to work on the Keystone article, and this separate page arose because of disagreement how/whether to include the Mormon example of the figurative use of "Keystone" in the keystone page itself. (Actually I think some discussion of the various figurative uses is quite appropriate, but that is a separate issue.) Now we have this rather stranded page -- it could be referenced from this page, but if the keystone is that significant, it should surely merit mention in the body of the text, and all of the content would fit in a small paragraph. (Currently 'keystone' occurs only in the title of one of the references.) Imaginatorium (talk) 07:17, 21 March 2014 (UTC)*I agree. User:Good Olfactory|Good Ol’factory (talk) 07:53, 21 March 2014 (UTC)**So do I. --Jgstokes (talk) 22:28, 21 March 2014 (UTC)***Makes sense. Slb1900 (talk) 06:23, 22 March 2014 (UTC)**Weak approval - I don't see a need for a separate article, but I also don't see a need for a focus. It is unquestioned that Joseph Smith made this statement and it has been repeated, but the keystone teaching itself is not a concept. If it is addressed there needs to be balance between this statement and the 8th Article of Faith, which is contained with the Standard Works of the Church. Daily speech affords hyperbole whereas scripture demands a whole different level of direction and review. --user:Storm Rider|'''''Storm;/font;'''''User talk:Storm Rider#top|'''''Rider;/font;''''' 18:38, 22 March 2014 (UTC)***If merged, I agree that all that would be necessary is a very short mention in Book of Mormon. I would think one sentence would suffice. It would probably just say something like, "Joseph Smith and other leaders of the LDS Church have characterized the Book of Mormon as the 'keystone' of Mormonism." The various sources in  Keystone symbol in Mormonism could follow the sentence. User:Good Olfactory|Good Ol’factory (talk) 02:19, 24 March 2014 (UTC)*I agree. I like the way that was worded. I would suggest that wording be implemented into the article ASAP. --Jgstokes (talk) 05:21, 24 March 2014 (UTC)*As creator of the "Keystone symbol in Mormonism" article, I agree that although the keystone symbol is an important concept in Mormonism, it probably doesn't merit its own page. The concept is already vaguely referenced in the third sentence in the "Religious Significance" section; perhaps it would be best to merge Good Olfactory's proposed sentence with the existing third sentence where the keystone concept is partially quoted. Lebaronmatthew (talk) 11:30, 24 March 2014 (UTC)*'''Agree.''' User:COGDEN|''COGDEN;'' 18:17, 13 May 2014 (UTC)Keystone metaphor seems very appropriate - the Wikipedia article gave a symbol off to the side which made it appear that that would be the symbol for representing Keystone.  If it is incorporated into the discussion and I think it would be very fine to do so.  It would need to represent the true meaning of the Keystone as the center or central stone that is used to hold up an arch that has it's center stone keeping the structure intact.  The fact that the Book of Mormon exists, That Joseph Smith was told where it was by an Angel, that God the Father and Jesus Christ who first appeared to Joseph set about the restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ that was lost to the world through an ancient apostacy from authority, doctrine, etc. - Have placed The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter - Day Saints, on the earth.  Would necessarily have to have the Book of Mormon hold up under all circumstances that could be thrown at it and brought to test it's authenticity.  It does hold up and has held up under every test I have been able to give it.  Sometimes the answers come immediately and sometimes it will take weeks and months before answers reveal themselves, but it always comes out true.  It holds up under all scrutiny.  Because it's true.Dalwiscombe (talk) 01:20, 21 May 2014 (UTC)What if this article just cites the quote and leaves it at that, without any advocacy one way or the other?  It is probably the most famous statement ever about the Book of Mormon itself.  Seems appropriate to include it on that basis, per Wikipedia Pillar 2 to "document and explain the major points of view, giving due weight with respect to their prominence".Perhaps something like "Smith asserted that the Book of Mormon 'was the most correct book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get closer to God by abiding by its principles, than by any other book'".  Pretty tough to be more major, weighty or prominent than that.  But then just leave it at that.  The reader can form their own opinion about such a strong statement. Dpammm (talk) 05:31, 21 June 2014 (UTC):While Smith's famous comment about his book is, as Dpamm states, "famous", the entire sentence doesn't need to be produced here.  While the phrase "more correct than any other" is probably the most famous snippet from the longer quote and should be included, the entire quote is overkill and reads more like an author's quote on the dust jacket of a bestseller.  Include a summary and the pithy meat of the quote certainly, but don't let Smith drone on and on about how great his book is all the way to the bitter end.  We've tried to avoid entire quotes most of the time when a clause or two is generally quite sufficient to get the point across.  --Taivo (talk) 13:53, 21 June 2014 (UTC)*'''Comment'''. Since this has been sitting for awhile now, I've completed the merge and incorporated the keystone info into the Religious significance section of the article.  User:Good Olfactory|Good Ol’factory (talk) 02:40, 6 November 2014 (UTC)**Seems fair. Bladesmulti (talk) 02:49, 6 November 2014 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 3 external links on Book of Mormon. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20110611230856/to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20150821202000/toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers. —User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;15:21, 25 August 2015 (UTC)