[Untitled]It's been a long time since I read the Bible, so I haven't bothered putting anything under prophets etc. as I don't really remember.  You might do better, though, going through the Bible book by book and adding significant characters.  And I  should of course start :Biblical_figures/Bibliography|/Bibliography to list The KJV and NIV translations.  ;-)  --KQI added all the prophets from the :Old Testament. '';lt;;gt;;lt; tbc''I am fairly sure that there were more prophets than this in the Bible. I will have to check. -User:rmhermenThere are many more. Jewish tradition lists 48 prophets and 7 prophetesses. Many of them, however, had only one prophecy, so they should not be included. However, several more should be given space on this page. User:E=MC^2|E=MC^2 User_talk:E=MC^2|T@lk----It is dubious to list :Jesus under the heading of "Prophets". Most of the mainstream Christian denominations would disagree with this, or alternatively would see Jesus as a prophet and also much more than that. (Figuring this out from just the text of the Bible is tricky though.)I don't really feel like jumping in and fixing this since religion can be a touchy subject and i lack the necessary diplomacy to write about it properly for an encyclopedia (also my knowledge is pretty rusty.) -- AnonymousI'm a Christian, and I agree it's touchy. I left Jesus in the list of prophets, though, because he certainly filled that role. (He preached more about :Hell and repentance than any other prophet, BTW.) There will always be tension between Jews and Christians about the :Bible, anyway, but since "Bible" in common usage means the :Christian Bible, while Jews refer to the Tanach, I think it's fair to treat :Biblical figures from a Christian perspective. Let the entries of the individuals speak for themselves. '';lt;;gt;;lt; tbc''----I am not sure why this page was ever added because there is already a List of Biblical names page.  69.3.16.31 15:40, 29 Jul 2003 (UTC)----''TBD: Someone went to the trouble of creating all these link placeholders, so I left them. But I cleaned them up, too. The concept of names in Wikipedia ;mdash; especially when applied to Biblical names ;mdash; is problematic. What to do about multiple names? What about the ambiguity of the unique people named John in the New Testament? These issues should be addressed before too many of these get filled in.;lt;;gt;;lt; tbc'':''This kind of problem has been discussed in a few places, and I've started rambling about it at talk:Naming conventions. -- Claudine ''''TBD: maybe a Wikipedian chould contact Mr. Cramer about putting his writeup into the public domain. It's very thorough and would make an excellent contribution to the Wikipedia.;lt;;gt;;lt; tbc''PROPHETS OF BIBLEThere were thousands of true prophets of God among the Jews in pristine age. Bible recorded few prophets from them. Jews says that Bible recorded only those prophets, whose messeges for future generation.—The preceding unsigned comment was added by 202.63.226.83 (talk • Special:Contributions/202.63.226.83|contribs).;;;Genealogical TreeWhat about making a Genealogical Tree of Biblical figures?—The preceding unsigned comment was added by Lucioseki (talk • Special:Contributions/Lucioseki|contribs).;;;:18 '''Done''' I've included an existing template with a genealogy from Adam to David, and rearranged the rest by categories in a way that is more likely to be useful. - Fayenatic london (talk) 13:25, 16 July 2007 (UTC)Incomplete listI added the template New Testament people, that shows the list here is pretty incomplete. That is a better list. History2007 (talk) 10:59, 25 July 2010 (UTC)Move discussion in progressThere is a move discussion in progress on Talk:List of Biblical names which affects this page. Please participate on that page and not in this talk page section. Thank you. ;; —RM bot 02:00, 14 November 2010 (UTC)LotShall we include Lot (biblical person)?Twillisjr (talk) 20:01, 21 November 2012 (UTC)