shoshumiStitt Feld Handy Group and ADR Chambers, two firms teaching and practicing ADR. We would like to contribute to articles relating to ADR, Mediation and Negotiation as we have members highly experienced in the subject. Our members have published books on the subject and are willing to share excerpts with citations and original material.We have attempted to update this article with an a excerpt about ADR System Design. A proper citation was used according to the wikipedia guidelines however, it was quickly removed, classed as vandalism, and we were giving a warning. We are hesitant to contribute again.We are willing to contribute, neutrally of course, if we knew how. Please contact me if you can be of any assistance.Material can be provided.Shoshumi (talk) 21:18, 18 January 2008 (UTC)203.109.250.xxx ... thanks for the assist on international aspects, a weak spot of mine. F. Lee HornWhile "alternative dispute resolution" should remain as a heading, I would recommend that the material on ADR in this article be severely edited and moved to "dispute resolution."  I would remove the material on zombies until it can be supported with some good citations and reference materials. "Alternative dispute resolution" doesn't usually connote methods that result in violence as implied by the author of this segment. I would  replace it with a larger section on traditional dispute resolution methods. Unfortunately I don't have time to rewrite this article at the moment. CAM 06:20, 27 December 2006 (UTC)ZombieThe Vodun priests of Haiti are well known for their dispute resolution role which occasionally resulted in the losing party being forced to become a zombie.What's this? Kim Bruning 10:21, 6 Sep 2004 (UTC):i think you need to read between the lines: zombies are well-known for their strange contributions to the wikipedia after losing wikipedia disputes mediated (or sometimes arbitrated) by Vodun admins of Haipedia. ;) Anyway, more seriously, i've put up  after the Vodun/zombie sentence. Today is 23:14, 19 May 2006 (UTC). If there's no citation within some reasonable delay (1 month?), then i suggest it be removed. Having some history of different examples of alternative dispute resolution can't hurt, but it should be WP:NOR. Non-zombie wikipedia editors might try googling to see if there's any sign of verifiable evidence for the claim. Boud 23:14, 19 May 2006 (UTC)Merge discussionI '''oppose''' merging this with dispute resolution - ADR is a well-defined legal concept that specifically encompasses means of resolving a dispute ''without'' resorting to a lawsuit (or, of course, violence). User:BD2412|'''''bd2412''''';/font; '''T''' 02:16, 21 August 2006 (UTC):I also '''oppose''' the merge for the same reason.  ADR is traditionally taught separately from dispute resolution.  DR is covered in civil procedure and criminal procedure courses.  --Coolcaesar 03:52, 21 August 2006 (UTC): I have removed ther merge tag due to it is missing from the Dispute Resolution Angelbo 21:11, 24 August 2006 (UTC)greenw47I am currently in the ADR program at my law school, and also getting qualified as a mediator. I have books, professors, and a bit of experience to draw from. I will contribute what I can. Greenw47 14:57, 27 September 2006 (UTC)CUNYIs the stuff on CUNY not just blatant spam?  Doesn't seem terribly encyclopediaic to me.  It is probably getting too much slack because it is a university and not a commercial enterprise. Legis 15:17, 12 October 2006 (UTC)Support for Merger: Alternative Dispute Resolution, Conflict Resolution, Dispute Resolution, Appropriate Dispute ResolutionI '''support''' merger of Alternative Dispute Resolution, Conflict Resolution, Dispute Resolution, Appropriate Dispute Resolution pages.I've been working in the field for some time and earned a graduate degree ; juris doctorate focused in ADR (or whatever term best fits for you).  The semantics debate in law reviews and in the field itself seems to have died down, as the field has become more established and integrated into the judiciary and businesses.I would suggest directing searches for Alternative Dispute Resolution, Conflict Resolution, Dispute Resolution, Appropriate Dispute Resolution to one page where information can be consolidate.  There are wonderful resources on each of the respective pages but each page differs.Perhaps a section to a unified page could be added discussing the evolution of the name of field.  All the names of the field tend to be used interchangeably but groups may have different preferences based on common usage due to their geographic region, industry, role or educational program.A unified page would also help educate potential ADR consumers, litigants, the judiciary, industry and the bar.  Separate linked pages could focus on particular processes (example: mediation, consensus building, arbitration, etc.), applications and related organizations.(Crossposted in Conflict Resolution, Dispute Resolution, Appropriate Dispute Resolution, etc).--Iceweaselqueen (talk) 15:10, 20 January 2008 (UTC):I '''support''' the merger because although ADR/CR/DR are taught in different law courses, they have considerable overlap in the subject matter and one article which summarizes ADR and then includes a part which points out major differences between ADR/CR/DR would be sufficient in my opinion.  Malibusurferdude (talk) 17:47, 20 April 2010 (UTC)Larger Questions About PageIt looks like the structure of this page has gotten a little out of control:* Do we really want to continue a country-by-country list of ADR examples?  If so, is there a better way to structure this information?* ADR Resources seems to become a link-driving haven, much like "External Links" used to be on this page.  These should be cleaned up.LittleKyle (talk) 15:09, 8 February 2010 (UTC):I completely agree. The country-by-country list is a little overboard. I suggest revising the section title to something similiar to "History and Development of ADR" and then adding a country-by-country list of how it differs in different regions. Malibusurferdude (talk) 18:30, 20 April 2010 (UTC)malibusurferdudeCompleted a degree in dispute resolution from the Straus Institute at Pepperdine. Currently working on an assignment to amp up wikipedia articles for a humanities course. Will try to add sources and expand on the information provided in the ADR article.  -Malibusurferdude (talk) 8:09, 14 April 2010 (UTC)Questions under "Types and features of alternative dispute resolution"Specifically--"(does negotiation once a law suit is filed cease to be ADR? If it is a tool, then the question is the wrong question) (is mediation ADR unless a court orders it? If you look at court orders and similar things as formalism, then the answer is clear: court annexed mediation is merely a formal ADR process)"These questions can be settled by reformatting the first sentence of this article to say "ADR includes dispute resolution processes and techniques that act as a means for disagreeing parties to come to an agreement short of litigation." Malibusurferdude (talk) 18:27, 20 April 2010 (UTC)out of placequote:"ADR traditions vary somewhat by country and culture. There are significant common elements which justify a main topic, and each country or region's difference should be delegated to sub-pages."this should probably not be publicly visible in the main article. Special:Contributions/66.222.228.147|66.222.228.147 (talk) 15:06, 19 August 2011 (UTC)basewikiI contacted Business ; Human Rights Resource Centre about basewiki. It isn't exsisting anymore. There is another organisation, which followed basewiki in some parts, but strong connection to ADR I couldn't see. I remove the basewiki-part in the articleAxelHellinger (talk) 08:08, 2 December 2013 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Alternative dispute resolution. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive https://web.archive.org/20060920125625/to *Added archiveWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;23:51, 24 January 2016 (UTC)