2010'''This article attracts a lot of trolls the best advice is to not feed them''';/center;__TOC__TerrorismFrom the abstract: ''"The second half of the paper investigates how Paul Greengrass’ films Bloody Sunday and United 93, which both deal with the topic of terrorism, transform the rhetorical dimension of a terrorist outrage, the main thesis being that the films appropriate the dimension of silence and speechlessness in order to become monuments of commemoration."'' Gob Lofa (talk) 20:58, 3 August 2015 (UTC):One academic's viewpoint does not quantify it's inclusion especially when it can't be cited in the article and made clear it is according to one academics viewpoint which thus falls foul of undue weight. Do you have other academic wors from a spectrum of authors that declare it as such? Quite an appropriate quote from WP:UNDUE is ''"'''Generally, the views of tiny minorities should not be included at all''', except perhaps in a "see also" to an article about those specific views. For example, the article on the Earth does not directly mention modern support for the Flat Earth concept, the view of a distinct minority; to do so would give undue weight to it."''. It is quite a minority viewpoint in academia, it's not listed as terrorism in the multitude of academic books I have on Irish history. Mabuska (talk) 22:08, 3 August 2015 (UTC)::Mabuska, you say in your edit summary one isn't enough. How many would be? Gob Lofa (talk) 18:47, 27 August 2015 (UTC):::The above response makes this issue pretty clear and was suffice for the category, but more so for the body of the article. It is a tiny minority viewpoint, and your specific placement of it in the article is inappropriate for such a minority viewpoint and the wording of it does not put into proper perspective. But most of all, it violates WP:UNDUE, and even if you could find a few more examples it is still an minority viewpoint—and a highly contentious one at that—that does not merit the status that you want to give it.:::If you continue to insist on this highly contentious and undue statement, then I can only suggest opening a RfC for more input for you will not convince me. Like seriously, putting such a highly contentious fringe viewpoint at the start of the second sentence of the lede as if it had credible weight. Mabuska (talk) 20:44, 27 August 2015 (UTC)I think the statement merits inclusion, albeit not in the lead. Is there another section where it might work? Kafka Liz (talk) 20:51, 27 August 2015 (UTC);/s;:Obviously I disagree considering we only have one source for it, however I don't see an appropriate section for such a tiny minority fringe viewpoint to put into a ''proper'' perspective in the article. It just doesn't fit into the sections we have in the article, a highly sensitive article at that, that doesn't need tinyminority viewpoints detracting from it. Per WP:UNDUE a reason for the inclusion of such a tiny minority viewpoint is perhaps in a "see also" to an article about those specific views and no such article exists. Or more specifically directly from WP:UNDUE:::''If a viewpoint is held by an extremely small (or vastly limited) minority, it does not belong in Wikipedia, regardless of whether it is true or you can prove it, except perhaps in some ancillary article.'':Mabuska (talk) 20:59, 27 August 2015 (UTC)::I'm not sure it's that kind of minority; at least one former Taoiseach has referred to it thus. It would fit nicely in 'Perspectives and analyses of the day'. Gob Lofa (talk) 21:08, 27 August 2015 (UTC):::Actually it wouldn't and you'd be giving one minority fringe view more coverage than it deserves. As already said, open a RfC for more input and/or provide more sources. If you do find more (biased or not, and a Taoiseach is hardly unbiased), then its going to need to be specifically worded to make sure the proper context is given, unlike your previous attempt. Specific wording that would be better drafted by an other editor considering your past issues with accurately using sources.:::Yet you still have to prove it is a minority viewpoint worthy of inclusion, and then the manner of how it is included. All we have is one academic whose credibility is not assured.:::You need a far stronger case Gob Lofa and you know the crack. Mabuska (talk) 10:43, 28 August 2015 (UTC)The above quote – from the abstract of the paper, as Gob Lofa acknowledges – does not reflect what the author actually says about Bloody Sunday. He says, "''This date marks the crossroads between the Civil Rights Movement and the Troubles, the violent radicalisation of the Northern Irish Conflict and the terrorist attacks committed by the Irish Republican Army''", and later, "''The film shows how members of the IRA immediately begin to recruit new members who will then be responsible for the terrorist attacks of the following decade''". Thus, although he says that the film deals with the ''topic'' of terrorism, he doesn't describe the killings themselves as terrorism.  Scolaire (talk) 12:15, 28 August 2015 (UTC):You're splitting hairs, Scolaire. He describes them as "a terrorist outrage". Mabuska, considering your past issues, it's difficult to accept your good intentions here. Gob Lofa (talk) 15:14, 28 August 2015 (UTC)::No, he doesn't, Gob Lofa. You're still taking words out of context from the abstract. Nowhere in the paper does he refer to the Bloody Sunday killings as a terrorist anything.  Scolaire (talk) 17:50, 28 August 2015 (UTC):::From the body: "In the following article, I will argue that the logic of terrorism follows a certain set of rules: as the main aim of an attack is not to kill but to shock or convince a wider public, they are in essence rhetorical. Against this backdrop I will investigate how both Bloody Sunday and United 93 face the rhetorical potential of terrorism. Both films, I will argue, turn out to be meta-rhetorical: by rhetorically commenting on the rhetoric of terrorism they ultimately transcend the logic of a terrorist outrage". Gob Lofa (talk) 18:02, 28 August 2015 (UTC)::::Which supports the point made by Scolaire ----User:Snowded|'''Snowded''';/font; User talk:Snowded#top|TALK;/font;;18:37, 28 August 2015 (UTC):::::No, Scolaire was saying the opposite. Gob Lofa (talk) 18:43, 28 August 2015 (UTC)::::::Sigh, I see you haven't changed in the two weeks I have been away ----User:Snowded|'''Snowded''';/font; User talk:Snowded#top|TALK;/font;;18:49, 28 August 2015 (UTC)::::::::I must confess, I didn't break out the champagne on your return. A bald "Which supports the point made by Scolaire" just comes across as flat out provocative time-wasting. Explain yourself or jog on. Gob Lofa (talk) 19:19, 28 August 2015 (UTC):::::::::''Bloody Sunday'' and ''United 93'' are two films. I take it that you know that. He says that he is going to discuss how the two films ''Bloody Sunday'' and ''United 93'' "rhetorically comment on the rhetoric of terrorism". That cannot in any way be construed as saying that the Bloody Sunday killings were a terrorist act. Which supports the point made by Scolaire.  Scolaire (talk) 22:19, 28 August 2015 (UTC):::::::::::So when he says "The second half of the paper investigates how Paul Greengrass’ films Bloody Sunday and United 93, which both deal with the topic of terrorism, transform the rhetorical dimension of a terrorist outrage...", what terrorist outrage do you believe he's referring to in regards to the first film? Gob Lofa (talk) 11:21, 29 August 2015 (UTC)::::::::::::And what terrorist outrage do you believe he's referring to in regards to the second film? Is it the killing of the hijackers and the downing of the plane by the passengers? If it's open to interpretation in one way it's also open to interpretation in the other. There's a reason that synthesis is not allowed on Wikipedia. Either he said in plain English that the Bloody Sunday killings were a terrorist act or he did not. Since you seem to have reread the paper a number of times, you know that he did not.  Scolaire (talk) 11:40, 29 August 2015 (UTC):::::::::::::Yes, as well as the downing of the towers. What's open to interpretation? Unless you know of other terrorist outrages in the films. Gob Lofa (talk) 11:56, 29 August 2015 (UTC)::::::::::::::I don't think you read my question. I asked you was he referring to the ''passengers'' as terrorists and the ''hijackers'' as the victims. If you take a sentence that doesn't make a clear statement and start adding your own commentary, it ''is'' open to more than one interpretation. But never mind: the simple fact is that you do not have a statement that it was terrorism, and you can't argue your way around it. I'm going to stop now. This is annoying as well as pointless.  Scolaire (talk) 12:33, 29 August 2015 (UTC):::::::::::::::You're right, I didn't read your question as carefully as I should have. I would contend that describing the passengers' action as terrorism is an interpretation so outlandish that I doubt you'd find any backers. Are you gaming? Gob Lofa (talk) 12:43, 29 August 2015 (UTC)::::::::::::::::I said never mind: the simple fact is that you do not have a statement that it was terrorism, and you can't argue your way around it. I also said I'm stopping this, and I am.  Scolaire (talk) 13:41, 29 August 2015 (UTC)CrimeHi Scolaire, I didn't create that category. Is your position that the killings were legal? Gob Lofa (talk) 21:28, 3 September 2015 (UTC):My position is what I said in my . Categories are not there to make political points. The other articles currently in it should also be removed, for the same reason.  Scolaire (talk) 21:50, 3 September 2015 (UTC)::At least you're consistent. Gob Lofa (talk) 22:00, 3 September 2015 (UTC)Obituary of General Sir Robert FordDaily Telegraph article contains the sentence.''In a confidential memorandum, written three weeks before Bloody Sunday, and sent to his superior officer, Lieutenant-General Sir Harry Tuzo, Ford stated that he was coming to the conclusion that the minimum force necessary to restore law and order was to shoot selected ringleaders among the “Derry Young Hooligans”.''  Feel free to use it.JRPG (talk) 17:04, 27 November 2015 (UTC)New Evidence With Considerable Impact ReleasedNew evidence released, relating to the event, which challenges the neutrality of the article and places the recent Saville enquiry into some doubt. If I have time I will edit the article for inclusion, anyone else in the meantime is welcome to include details, regards.Twobells (talk) 12:18, 1 March 2016 (UTC):You mean "The British Army's first confidential report... Written hours after 13 civilians were shot dead in Derry in 1972"? That's not "new" by any stretch of the imagination. It is an old self-serving fabrication subsequently proved to be almost totally false. Nick Cooper (talk) 15:48, 1 March 2016 (UTC)::Still, pushing your agenda instead of neutral, balanced fact I see. Do you ever actually read the source material or just put on your rose-coloured glasses and proceed to pontificate on Wikipedia? No wonder people mock the encyclopedia. No-one has ever seen this report before and the source requires inclusion to ensure balance and neutrality. Twobells (talk) 17:25, 1 March 2016 (UTC):::I suspect I have read more on the event than you ever have (I was certainly editing this page long before you turned up). Effectively all that has happened is that someone has turned up the Army's first draft of the line they managed to get past Widgery, but which has been totally discredited since. Nick Cooper (talk) 13:25, 2 March 2016 (UTC)