Untitled''Er, quick...is this copyrighted?  I looked on the web and found no evidence whatever that it is public domain.  Therefore, you should entirely remove this from Wikipedia, correct?  Curiously, LMS''----Errrrrr nooooooo! I read Automated Alice and just finished it yesterday, what I've wrote so far are ''my'' (Neeklamy's) own words, I didn't lift them from anywhere!I find it a bit disconcerting to be accused of plagiarism - was it not obvious that this text is just a summary? That I wrote it (in good heart) in the style of the book? The book itself came out in 1996 and has been published a number of times over since - it's out there for anyone to track down ISBN: 0552999059 and read and it runs to a bit more than a few mere paragraphs of poorly revised text (more like 252 pages of some very witty dialogue).I'm sure you didn't mean offence, what with a number of indivduals stealing wholesale from various resources, but seriously, idle accusations of copyright infringement aren't appreciated at all - personally I would never plagiarise and would never do anything to harm this new forum.(half inch = pinch, Cockney rhyming slang)----I assume that's why Larry left the text here and merely asked the question, rather than simply deleting it as should be done for a clear infringement (NOTE: copyright infringement and plagiarism are two entirely different things--don't confuse them).  It is the nature of Wikipedia that authors here must be thick-skinned in the face of such questions, and peer edits, and commentary about articles, and many other things.  It is important that such potentially offensive things get said and replied to rather than being supressed out of a misguided and counterproductive sense of "politeness".  --LDC----Hate to repeat myself - but read what I wrote, hardly a novel is it? And if it were I'd ask for my money back :-)Common sense - it's cheap, limitless and enviro-friendly - use it. Thank you----The third book of the adventures of Alice by Charles Dodgson,er, that isn't right, Lewis Carroll,no, no, by :Automated_Alice/Zenith O Clock|Zenith O'Clock...by Jeff Noon...?yes! that's it!Steam PunkIn the genre box at the top of the article this is described as cyberpunk. Surely it is in fact steam punk. e.g. The computer in the book is hardly high techSchizocarp (talk) 15:29, 4 November 2012 (UTC)