Charybdis and ChalybesIt is possible that Charybdis was the mutation of Chalybians or Chalybes (a people lived at coast of northern Asia Minor, compare Halybe of Homer)).Scylla was the mutation of Scolotians or Scoloti (a Schythian people lived at European-Thracian coast of Black Sea).Both were the terror of sailors who have been travelled across Bosporus, in during of 2nd/1st millennium B.C.--IonnKorr 15:25, 31 October 2005 (UTC)OdysseyIs it worth mentioning that the Charybdis is one of the major trials faced by Odysseus? ;mdash;User:Ilyanep|IlyanWikipedia:Esperanza|eUser:Ilyanep|p User talk:Ilyanep|(Talk) 01:15, 6 January 2006 (UTC)"Odysseus was not so fortunate; he chose to risk Scylla at the cost of some of his crew rather than lose the whole ship to Charybdis. (Homer's Odyssey, Book XII)." It already has been.:At this time, the article text does refer to Charybdis as a "trial of Odysseus" -- paragraph beginning "Stranded on a makeshift raft, ..." (there's much more that's been included).  So it's been taken care of.  Dave Fafarman (talk) 18:18, 12 December 2007 (UTC)Contradiction"In Greek mythology, '''Charybdis''' or '''Kharybdis''' ("'''sucker down'''", Greek ;mdash; '''Χάρυβδις''') was a sea monster, daughter of Poseidon and Gaia." and "Charybdis was originally a sea-nymph who flooded land to enlarge her father's underwater kingdom, until Zeus turned her into a monster."  Is a daughter of Gaia and Poseidon a sea-nymph?--Randalllin 07:03, 20 December 2006 (UTC)The children of Posieden are usually cyclopes(child of Poseiden ; a wood-nymph) or sea-nymphs(child of Poseiden ; a goddess). I think Gaia is the mother of the titans but she counts as a goddess. She is the grandmother of the gods. 66.143.165.58 01:48, 21 December 2006 (UTC)JadeeSlightly disturbed by this sentence. It smacks of someone trying to sneak something obscene into a wiki entry. I'm not an expert in mythology, but I'm pretty sure this is highly inaccurate."She swallows huge amounts of water three times a day and then belches them back out again creating whirlpools."CThornett 17:05, 1 March 2007 (UTC)Actually, this is an accurate description (though a bit blunt).  The version I read said "spits it up again", but it's the same thing. 24.167.67.174 23:38, 22 April 2007 (UTC)PronunciationAnyone know how Charybdis is usually pronounced by anglophones? --Surturz 04:23, 12 March 2007 (UTC):According to ''Gods, Demigods ; Demons: An Encyclopedia of Greek Mythology'' by Bernard Evslin, "kuh RIB dihss". --OGoncho 23:34, 19 May 2007 (UTC)Deletion of Homer's Odyssey: The Voyage HomeWhy was "Homer's Odyssey: The Voyage Home" deleted from this article?  This was a radio drama version of the epic poem by Homer which prominently featured the monster Charybdis.  This article includes many instances in which Charybdis is referenced in popular culture, including video games, films, books and popular music.  This was a radio drama retelling of the Charybdis story from Homeric myth, as heard on XM Satellite Radio -- how was it irrelevant to the subject matter?  Soundout (talk) 00:57, 16 September 2008 (UTC)II haven't seen the original article where this was actually a part of, but I must agree on one thing:  Homer's Odyssey is including Charybdis as a prominent character.  I didn't know about her until I had to read about her (in Latin class) in connection with the Odyssey.Janet1983 (talk) 01:23, 11 August 2010 (UTC)WhirlpoolWasn't the myth of Charybdis based upon a whirlpool that actually appears in the straits between Sicily and Italy?I think it's the other way round - there were legends about the straits of Scylla and Charybdis that were applied to the Straits of Messina when the Greeks discovered it and applied existing myths to new areas - the text of the Odyssey suggests there was no significant knowledge of the Western Mediterranean at the time of the the Trojan War so it is more likely that legends associated with it and the hero' return home would have originated somewhere within the Greek's known world. (And in the Jason ; the Argonauts story which also features Scylla, the Argo was sailing down the Adriatic sea.) The channel between the island of Levkas and the mainland of Greece has been suggested - the headland near the entrance is called Cape Skilla and there's a mountain overlooking the channel called Lamia - which was a long necked monster that attacked the hero... As the channel is now blocked up by a causeway it's impossible to tell if there was ever a whirlpool, but the local tides could have created one such as Homer describes.—Preceding unsigned comment added by Shawn Baggett (talk • Special:Contributions/Shawn Baggett|contribs) 10 Dec. 2014;;;