'''Major Overhaul of this PageTonight I am going to be doing a major overhaul of the structure of this page in hopes of cleaning it up. It needs to be done as this page is of terrible standards currentlyWanderson9 (talk) 07:37, 6 January 2011 (UTC)OK, finished what I could for tonight and I am confident that the website is in at least a somewhat better state. I do hope that someone could go through and add sources. I would also like to clarify that I AM in fact user:72.130.92.98 as I forgot to login on my second computer. Wanderson9 (talk) 08:02, 6 January 2011 (UTC)DiscussionBearian (talk) 21:27, 15 January 2008 (UTC)This text originally came from a very old source whose copyright has expired.  Please feel free to update and expand.  --KQYou're absolutely correct about your revision, LDC.  Had I been in a court of law, I would have sworn that I read 3 years ago that the trademark had not been defended vigilantly and therefore was abandoned, but a search shows that not to be the case.  Tsk, tsk, apparently I can't write ''anything'' from memory, but must constantly research and validate....crazy pagesThis is not a disambiguation page as such things are defined (Wikipedia:Disambiguation and related pages).  This is more a full-blown article, albeit one in a quasi-list format.  Thus, I'm removing the disambiguation template. Courtland 02:23, 23 August 2005 (UTC):It's a chimeric cross between a disambig and a monstrously overgrown dicdef. --Smack (talk) 04:20, 26 August 2005 (UTC)::I'm working now on the rather lengthy process of taming the monster and qsdddddwfeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeconfining it to the :Category:Signpost articles pen. Courtland 15:04, 30 October 2005 (UTC)::: The dab tag is back, and it's now a dab cleanup tag.  Should it be removed again?  What's the deal with this page? Tedernst | talk 06:08, 9 December 2005 (UTC):::: Sorry, my mistake when :Category:Signpost articles was deleted. Susvolans User talk:Susvolans|⇔ 17:18, 11 December 2005 (UTC)Do we really need all those pictures? =='''I don't think we do. I'm not sure what you all think. 74.116.137.2 00:26, 3 September 2007 (UTC)*Pictures deleted; they deal with non-legal uses of "abandonment", whereas the article concerns only legal and quasi-legal uses. Fbarw 13:32, 7 October 2007 (UTC)Redirect Page ProblemsSome person called "Taxidermy sunset" left me some kind of insulting message- and now I can't find their userpage because they obviously redirected it to the "Abandonment" article for whatever reason- please tell me if I can possibly fix this. --Onondagan opossum 10:33, 24 September 2007 (UTC)Revision of earlier editsOn 20 September, Coolcaesar deleted my edits of this article, explaining: “Reverting edits in clear violation of official policy Wikipedia: Wikipedia is not a dictionary (or a thesaurus or usage guide), please go to Wiktionary”. Here is my reply:Thanks for your guidance. I have revised my edits accordingly, eliminating all non-legal definitions while maintaining improvements in the original. These changes do the following:*1.	Revises the cover paragraph to make it clear that the article deals only with legal and quasi-legal uses (with other meanings to be sought in Wiktionary).*2.	Deletes the images, as they all pertain to non-legal uses.*3.	Amplifies the general legal definition of “abandonment”, and inserts a link to “waiver”.*4.	Adds a mention of “taciturnity” in Scots law.*5.	Adds brief references to “dereliction”, “derelict”, “abandonee”, “relinquishment”, “res nullius” and “squatting”, with links where they exist. As these are all legal terms directly related to abandonment, they seem appropriate to this article.*6.	 Adds a sentence defining “abandonment” to an insurer, a reference and link to “constructive total loss”, and an additional definition relating to carriage of goods.*7.	“Abandonment of trademark” is moved up to follow copyright and a paragraph on patents is added, bringing the three paragraphs on intellectual property protection together.*8.	A sentence is added to cover abandonment in transport regulation, preceding the existing sentence on English practice.*9.	A link to “dereliction of duty” is added to the paragraph on military law.*10.	Sentences on “desertion” and “malicious abandonment” are inserted preceding the existing sentence on child abandonment, to which is added the terms “exposure” and “exposition”.*11.	The paragraph on “abandonment of an easement” is given greater precision.*12.    Reorders paragraphs to group paragraphs related to property at the top of the article.*13.    Removes headings, as the article now deals only with legal aspects.There is one point on which I would appreciate help. The paragraph on “abandonment of an action” deals solely with practices in the United Kingdom. Can something be added to make this more universal, like the sentence on transport regulation?--Fbarw 00:29, 5 October 2007 (UTC))Requested move 19 February 2014;;:''The following discussion is an archived discussion of a requested move. '''Please do not modify it.''' Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on the talk page. Editors desiring to contest the closing decision should consider a move review. No further edits should be made to this section. ''The result of the move request was: '''moved'''.  There is clear consensus that legal abandonment is not a primary topic, and that "abandonment" should redirect to a disambiguation page.  Such a page currently exists at Abandon (disambiguation), which includes uses of both "abandon" and "abandonment".  This seems the proper target. Xoloz (talk) 19:48, 27 February 2014 (UTC)----:Abandonment → Abandonment (legal) – The title of "Abandonment" should go firstly to a disambiguation page, which is what this page was created to be before it was converted into a mostly legal article. "Abandonment" would only be given to this page if legal abandonment were the primary use of the word (as per WP:MOSDAB), which it is not. -- Iamozy (talk) 00:10, 19 February 2014 (UTC)Survey:''Feel free to state your position on the renaming proposal by beginning a new line in this section with'' *'''Support''' ''or'' *'''Oppose''''', then sign your comment with'' ~~~~''. Since polling is not a substitute for discussion, please explain your reasons, taking into account Wikipedia's policy on article titles.''*'''Support'''. Psychological abandonment is at least as strong a topic to refer to as the legal topics. User:BD2412|'''''bd2412''''';/font; '''T''' 05:44, 19 February 2014 (UTC)*'''support''' per BD2412 -- Special:Contributions/70.50.151.11|70.50.151.11 (talk) 06:38, 20 February 2014 (UTC)*'''Support'''. No clear primary topic. --User:BrownHairedGirl|BrownHairedGirl (talk) • (Special:Contributions/BrownHairedGirl|contribs);15:20, 20 February 2014 (UTC)*  '''and support'''. Preference for the disambiguation page. Mama meta modal (talk) 15:09, 23 February 2014 (UTC).DiscussionThe Abandonment (legal) page should contain the legal aspects of abandonment, and other forms of abandonment will be directed to on the disambiguation page. Since there are so many forms of abandonment and related articles named some variation of the word, it would really help the reader to direct them first to a disambig page, from which they can find what they're actually looking for. --Iamozy (talk) 00:12, 19 February 2014 (UTC):''The above discussion is preserved as an archive of a requested move.  '''Please do not modify it.''' Subsequent comments should be made in a new section on this talk page or in a move review. No further edits should be made to this section.;/div;;;