artificial intelligenceOn going issues===Length;;I argue that this is WP:Summary article of a large field, and that therefor it is okay that it runs a little long. Currently, the article text is at around ten pages, but the article is not 100% complete and needs more illustrations. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 18:29, 2 November 2010 (UTC)Todo: Long-Term GoalsThe long term goals page is not comprehensive. It also has no sources. Needs immediate editing ----Trt94Todo: Illustration;;The article needs a lead illustration and could use more illustrations throughout. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 18:29, 2 November 2010 (UTC):Thanks to User:pgr94, the article is 70% illustrated. Almost there. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 00:03, 16 June 2011 (UTC)::Main illustration doesn't provide an actual example of an Artificial Intelligence, just a robot capable of mimicking human actions in a certain area (Namely, sport)  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/86.163.226.52|86.163.226.52 (talk) 15:37, 4 August 2011 (UTC);; ;;: I've reverted the addition of a picture of the replica of a fictional AI to the lead. I don't think this fits the focus of this article which is about real-life AI endeavours (see for example comments in #Some definitions of AI). --Mirokado (talk) 13:15, 25 October 2014 (UTC)::While the importance of limiting the article's content to real science cannot be understated, the current lead illustration, an "AI themed mug," seems to undercut the seriousness of the topic more than a picture of HAL 9000 would. ScreamingRobot (talk) 00:24, 21 May 2015 (UTC)Todo: Applications;;The "applications" section does not give a comprehensive overview of the subject. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 18:29, 2 November 2010 (UTC)Todo: Topics covered by major textbooks, but not this article;;I can't decide if these are worth describing (in just a couple of sentences) or not. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 18:29, 2 November 2010 (UTC)#Could use a tiny section on symbolic learning methods, such as explanation based learning, relevance based learning, inductive logic programming, case based reasoning.#Could use a tiny section on knowledge representation tools, like semantic nets, frames, scripts etc.#Control theory could use a little filling out with other tools used for robotics.#Should mention Constraint satisfaction. (Under search). Discussion below, at Talk:Artificial intelligence/Archive 4#Constraint programming.#Should mention the Frame problem in a footnote at least. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 19:52, 3 February 2011 (UTC)Todo: redlinks and tags;;#Where can we link Belief calculus? Does this include Dempster-Shafer theory (according to R;N)? I think that's more or less deprecated. Does R;N include expectation-maximization algorithm as a kind of belief calculus? I don't think so. Where is this in Wikipedia?#There are still several topics with no source: Subjective logic, Game AI, etc. All are tagged in the article. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 19:59, 3 February 2011 (UTC)Opinion BasedI just read this article and quite frankly it reads like a list of opinions on the subject. Unfortunately most of these opinions are entirely subjective,including the ones from Alan Turing and many are from people who are not actually researching AI in a professional manner (like Penrose). There has to be a better way to talk about AI than this and I would suggest to separate this article,which is rather philosophical/historical in nature (at best), from an actual technical article about AI proper. I would help with this effort, if I could, but I am a physicist and not a AI researcher and I do feel strongly that an active AI researcher needs to rewrite this in its entirety ASAP. The community may want to try to actively recruit an expert if nobody with a sufficient background has volunteered, yet. Special:Contributions/87.229.87.235|87.229.87.235 (talk) 14:34, 24 July 2015 (UTC):Disagree -- read the "tools" and "approaches" sections. ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 20:25, 2 December 2015 (UTC):I agree that it is opinion based. Read this line in History section "In the 1990s and early 21st century, AI achieved its greatest successes, albeit somewhat behind the scenes." - there is no source to back this up. ----Trt94A little light reliefWe're all doomed!pending edit requestIn Applied Behavior Analysis, the science has been democratized into artificially intelligent and intuitive code, allowing a lay person to go online and deliver self-directed clinical treatment in the absence of a clinician based on the positive behavior support principles set by the Behavior Analyst Certification Board. -  The peer reviewed concept was presented at the annual international conference of the Association for Behavior Analysis (2013) by Deborah Lee Safko, BCBA in an effort to demonstrate the benefits of using artificial intelligence to change the treatment rate for all intellectual disabilities.*As I was unsure about this edit I have opened a discussion here, my main issue was the notability and the primary source of the detail, nothing really explained why it was worth reporting it here or whose opinion it was. Please discuss. Govindaharihari (talk) 04:08, 28 November 2015 (UTC)::I think you are right -- the sources do not meet the criteria in WP:RS and so this material should not be added to the article. Looie496 (talk) 17:22, 28 November 2015 (UTC)*The peer reviewed concept was presented at the annual international conference of the Association for Behavior Analysis (2013) by Deborah Lee Safko, BCBA in an effort to demonstrate the benefits of using artificial intelligence to change the treatment rate for all intellectual disabilities.  AI has now been iterated in a manner that allows access to treatment when none would otherwise be available.  In a blind test, a parent can produce the same reports as a clinician, artificially.  https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant;rlz=1C1ASUT_enUS515US515;ion=1;espv=2;ie=UTF-8#q=bipartisan+ABA+autism-u A bi-partisan initiative has now been adopted by Senator Marco Rubio and Senator Bill Nelson to recognize the AUTISM-U software as a "provider" by CMS, a designation historically limited to human beings (contact the Senators' offices for verification).  If successful, this initiative would mark a watershed moment in AI, whereby its deployment can change the current treatment rate of the primary treatment for autism, ADHD, etc. from less than 1% to 100%, and potentially save 600 Billion dollars in the projected cost of autism (projected to cost 1 Trillion by 2025, before the new prevalence rates were reported at 1:45). InfoPurist (talk) 15:27, 28 November 2015 (UTC)InfoPurist**What part of wiki guidelines does this detail disrupt? Govindaharihari (talk) 20:55, 28 November 2015 (UTC)First, the peer reviewed sources are within the Wikipedia guidelines.  Contrary to the assertion that the citation is an abstract, the content guidelines require precisely that, and to avoid lengthy full text primary sources.Second, the policy on sourcing is verifiability.  The verifiable sources are reliable (Stanford University, Behavior Analyst Certification Board, Florida Association of Behavior Analysts, Association for Behavior Analysis International, and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) are demonstrable leaders in academics, behavioral health, healthcare, and technology, and Autism-U is sourced as the creator of the work).  According to Wikipedia's definition of a source Definition of a sourceThe word "source" when citing sources on Wikipedia has three related meanings:The piece of work itself (the article, book)The creator of the work (the writer, journalist)The publisher of the work (for example, Random House or Cambridge University Press)Any of the three can affect reliability. Reliable sources may be published materials with a reliable publication process, authors who are regarded as authoritative in relation to the subject, or both. These qualifications should be demonstrable to other people.Third, the company Autism-U is inherently notable according to the terms for notability, as it is the focus of a bipartisan initiative to recognize its software as a provider by CMS, a designation historically reserved to humans, and would represent a watershed moment in artificial intelligence.  Arbitrary standards should not be used to create a bias favoring larger organizations or their products, when the information verified and sourced includes the use of artificial intelligence to increase access to behavioral health treatment on a scale never before possible. Wikipedia is supposed to include updated information.  Referring to sources in 2007 is relegating Wikipedia users to a historic, and not current, event when the advances in artificial intelligence, according to Moore's Law, demand we have learned something since 2007 which may be beneficial for Wiki readers to review.  The ability to self-manage treatment and crowdsource clinical trial data having been verified since 2013, it is relevant to the field of AI that it be recognized as the catalyst, hence the edits to this section. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Notability_(organizations_and_companies) The arbitrary removal suggests bias for the reasons stated above.Finally, this detail disrupts the Wikipedia guidelines that editors suggest maintain the dependency on clinicians for verification of any healthcare treatment data.  AI enabled self-directed (DIY) behavioral health treatment in the absence of a clinician.  It is ironic that the capacity for AI to supercede the current definitions of what it means to be a healthcare provider is being quashed by the editors of the AI page.InfoPurist (talk) 04:15, 1 December 2015 (UTC)InfoPurist:I don't feel that the sources are strong enough to justify including this material, and I don't feel that the material has broad enough importance to justify including it in an encyclopedia entry about AI. Looie496 (talk) 12:58, 1 December 2015 (UTC)::Agreed. The issue is not WP:notability, or WP:Verifiability. The issue is WP:Relevance. This is the introductory article on artificial intelligence, and artificial intelligence is very large field.  I would look for a place in a more specific article. Look through the articles on applications of AI (is there an article with applications of AI in health care?). Or, you could look at the techniques this company is using and place the content down there.  ---- CharlesGillingham (talk) 20:04, 2 December 2015 (UTC)Section 2.4 "performance at chess is super-human and nearing strong super-human"Is the quote "performance at chess is super-human and nearing strong super-human" really accurate? If "strong super human" is to mean "better than all humans", I believe it is safe to say computers are strong super human. Stockfish 7, the best chess engine currently, is rated at 3341 ELO, whereas the best human chess player currently, Magnus Carlsen, has an ELO of 2844--Mornarben (talk) 17:50, 26 February 2016 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 1 external links on Artificial intelligence. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;07:02, 27 February 2016 (UTC)