Turn is period?Reddwarf2956 has been making some improvements to this article (which I support), but we seem to disagree on the definition of a turn.  I don't understand how it can be a period.  Am I missing something?  User:Dbfirs|''D;/font;b;/font;f;/font;i;/font;r;/font;s;/font;;/font;'' 07:29, 15 September 2013 (UTC):A circular movement is periodic, and the turn is its period. Nevertheless this concept seems too technical for this elementary article, and it is better to avoid to mention "period" here. However, I agree that this paragraph is not satisfactory, as giving a circular :-) definition. Therefore, I suggest "the '''turn''' is the angle for which the above circular arc is the complete circle". D.Lazard (talk) 09:53, 15 September 2013 (UTC)::I agree that there might be some loose association of a turn with a period in some usage, but I still don't see how a turn can be a unit of time.  I agree with your suggested improvement.  User:Dbfirs|''D;/font;b;/font;f;/font;i;/font;r;/font;s;/font;;/font;'' 06:25, 18 September 2013 (UTC)Transversal and polygons both have interior angles and exterior anglesComments at the article edit: "I don't see what the association is for polygons.  No mention at the linked article." See Angle#Polygon_related_angles.  Let's add to the current statements and move them to in a different section of angle. But, we still need some references to both interior angles and exterior angles of Transversal_(geometry) with the Transversal section in angle and with polygons. Maybe combine the transversal and polygons sections together and define the terms?John W. Nicholson (talk) 02:51, 23 September 2013 (UTC)Small article mergerI am trying to combine as many of the small articles on different angles into angle (per talk), but I realize that some may not fit very well. Those like transversal, polygon, and both interior angles and exterior angles don't seem to fit currently, and wiki currently has separate articles. Others like Adjacent, Complementary, Supplementary, and Vertical angles seem to easily fit. Please take look at these and decide if any more parts should be moved to this article, angle, as to keep the information or start a AfD for each. Feel free to start a AfD if you feel that it's good.  — Preceding unsigned comment added by Reddwarf2956 (talk • Special:Contributions/Reddwarf2956|contribs) 21:25, 24 September 2013 (UTC);;; ;;:RockMagnetist used a template   to document nicely, within the initial section (consisting primarily of "header templates") on this talk page, their own merging into the accompanying article page of the 4 (small) angles articles that RD had alluded to as "seem[ing] to easily fit". (I would infer, from RD's (mistaken) ref to AfD that ''RD'' did 4 merges, so perhaps RM ''re-merged'', believing there had earlier been a problem with each.);;Of course RD deserves at least our gratitude for the valuable work of calling attention to the opportunity, while (by the way) knowing, for use in this talk section, neither::* the pipe-trick markup that lets an editor avoid, e.g., a link to the Dab'n of the term "transversal", by linking instead to the actual article "Transversal (geometry)", yet displaying "Transversal", and::* what you might call "the suffix trick" -- eliminating the last blank in the markup for "Internal and external angle s" to get, ''wikt:voilà|voilà'', "Internal and external angles", thus avoiding the misleading impression that "interior angles and exterior angles"  invites: that WP regards external angles as "the mere bastard siblings" of internal angles.:--Jerzy•t 07:16, 21 July 2014 (UTC)::Note the date stamps: I did the merges a few months after the comments by Reddwarf2956. RockMagnetist (talk) 15:41, 21 July 2014 (UTC)Definition?The definition of angle on the main page seems rather vague. Perhaps a better definition would be:the fraction of the arc of a circle with a center at the origin of the angle.That way degrees can be clearly defined as:(s/c);times;360and radians as:(s/c);times;2π = s/rwhere s = arc length, c = circumphrence, and r = radius.''Evidently unsigned, but from about late 2001; see Jerzy's contrib below which begins "The initial contrib ..." .;'':I agree that the definition in the first paragraph of the main page is vague, and in fact inaccurate because an angle is not necessarily bounded and so cannot be defined as a figure; defining them in terms of measure as the second paragraph does is a better approach.  However, I don't agree with this comment in defining an angle in terms of a circle because while angles exist in a context that is essential to the specification of their measure definition, angles are not necessarily part of a circle.Skylarkmichelle (talk) 19:47, 19 December 2013 (UTC):: "Angle" has two different meanings. It is first a geometrical figure (or shape). As such, the first paragraph is not vague (the figure is precisely defined). It is not only accurate, but also correct, which is important. Note that this definition dates to Euclides, more than 2000 ago.:: "Angle" is also a measure. As a measure, there are many equivalent ways to define it, which involve either circles or trigonometry. The definition given here seems to be the simplest. It says implicitly that, to measure an angle (figure) in which there is no circle, one has to draw a circle centered at the vertex of the angle and to measure the ratio of the length of the arc delimited by the figure and the radius of the circle. D.Lazard(talk) 20:37, 19 December 2013 (UTC):::I want to endorse the thrust of DL's comment, while saying that IMO it's not precise enuf for the article -- a choice that i not only respect, but probably agree with.--Jerzy•t 16:30, 20 July 2014 (UTC):The initial contrib to this ''section'' joined the ''page'' between 17:54, 30 August 2001 and  15:43, 25 February 2002, i.e. approximately late in the first year of WP; this section's heading, at least, was retrofitted later. (The "user" shown in the edit history, user:Conversion script, was a special piece of code that i've never bothered to acquire any substantive knowledge of, but clearly was used in the very early days -- on many, perhaps all, of  the pages that then existed -- probably in order to add or improve an important, but presumably relatively obscure, design feature in the early wiki engine. It may be that no record of even the IP address of the contributor was ever made. In short, and for certain, ''i'' cannot determine anything beyond its being contributed to WP between day 1 -- very early in 2001 -- and the 2002 date.)--Jerzy•t 16:30, 20 July 2014 (UTC)talk page destruction!Who eviscerated this talk page?  Yesterday it had 36 sections and today it has 4?!!  Skylarkmichelle (talk) 22:43, 20 December 2013 (UTC):The discussions have been Archived but are still available for reading. At the header of this discussion page, click Show in the Archive bar. Then click on the numeral 1 that appears at the left. You can refer to issues that have been raised, but bring your discussion to this current Talk. It is common practice to Archive old discussions from lengthy talk pages.Rgdboer (talk) 03:14, 21 December 2013 (UTC)Proposed mergeI had been contemplating merging the article Internal and external angle into the section Polygon related angles here since this section was better written and there did not appear to be much chance of expanding the current article. I would have done this myself, but a recent spate of activity suggests that I had better ask for some opinions on this merge. Bill Cherowitzo  (talk) 18:43, 4 October 2014 (UTC):'''Support''', with sources added. Otherwise '''delete'''. - DVdm (talk) 19:21, 4 October 2014 (UTC):weak '''Oppose''' - looking at this article leaves with a somewhat dissatisfied feeling as it mixes imho to many things which might be clearer to various readers if they are structured differently and distributed over several articles. That is in particular separate different levels of mathematical approaches from notational, engineering or unit related material. In addition the current mathematical part somewhat switches unstructured between rather abstract notions (without any motivation) and more elementary ones. We would need an angle treatment on highschool level (comprising angle between lines, 2d and 3d vectors, lines and planes, between planes), then the generalisation to curves and surves, more than 3 dimensions and non euclidean spaces. This could be handled in one large ''well structured'' article but imho for accessibilty/readabilty reasons 2-3 articles might be better. In any case those should be separated from the other (non-math) content in the current article. Since I favour the splitting and restructuring (as well as extending the splitted parts) of this article, I'm somewhat opposed to merging additional stuff into this article.--Kmhkmh (talk) 18:34, 7 April 2015 (UTC)