QuestionableIMHO a lot of this is veering perilously close to Bad jokes and other deleted nonsenseNo, Baldrick is a major sociological phenomenon in the UK. The phrase 'a cunning plan' is seemingly ubiquitous... sjcAlso, I'm fairly certain that a "Baldrick" may mean a servant, as the character Baldrick is. But this series is very popular, and Baldrick is a famous character in the UK, as are Rowan Attkinson and Ben Elton in general. That phrase -- "a cunning plan" -- is certainly well-known. -- SamNeed a source:''So much is the character associated with the phrase, "I have a cunning plan," that for example there is a landmine detection device that is so cunning that it is has been dubbed the Baldrick.  ''(I heard about this on the radio in someplace like Cambodia or Afghanistan -- does anyone have a particular reference to it?)''''I've cut this until we can find a source; I'll ask my housemate (who happens to do research in landmine detection...) User:Matt Crypto|;mdash; Matt 05:27, 26 Jul 2004 (UTC)Fourth Baldrick possibly being cleverer than is made outDoes anyone else share my belief that the 'proof' of the Fourth Baldrick's stupidity possibly shows he's more clever than he is? 'Very small', indeed.:I have always thought the fourth Baldirck was the stupidest (although posibly the most hygenic). This is ilustrated in Private Plane when Blackader said "say thank you Baldrick" (to the red barron) and Baldrick said "Thank you Baldrick". This is simmilar to Nob and Nobility in series 3 when Blackadder told Baldrick to say the same thing (to count de frou frou) and Baldrick said "Thank you Mr. Frou". However the Baldirck in Private Plane may have ,cleverly, tried to be rude to the Red Barron. Just a thought. Dr.-B 05:37, 25 November 2006 (UTC)::I'm not sure.  There is a twist at the end of the last episode, just before they go over the top where he points out a huge splinter on the trench ladder pointing out that somone could seriously hurt themselfs on it.   Had Blackadder picked up on that he could have purpously injured himself, therfor not having to actually go over the top and meed his almost certain death.  It is ironic that it is Baldrik, who after series of useless cunning plans, and not Capt. Blackadder that actually comes up with a plausible way to escape. There is the fact that Baldrik noticed this, however he was unable to make the connection of splinter to getting out of the war.  Whetehr that is the evidince that he is indeed clever but resigned to his fate, or still stuid for not making the link, I am not entierly sure. (Moncky (talk) 05:15, 13 March 2008 (UTC)):::The splinter is a separate joke, nothing to do with Baldrick's plan.  The joke is that Baldrick is concerned about something as trivial as a splinter when he's about to go over the top.  A soldier wouldn't be invalided out because of a splinter, when an attack was moments away.  Fricasso (talk) 00:23, 18 October 2008 (UTC)QuotationsWikipedia is not the place for including extensive sections of dialogue. If you want them including, then it will be a better idea to create a wikiquote page. Better still, why not an external link to a fan site with these extracts? By the way I am an arsehat.The JPS 10:08, 10 December 2005 (UTC)All quotes were moved to Wikiquote article "Blackadder" as per your suggestion. You could have done it yourself rather than attempting to delete them. User:Dimadick:Yes, that is the best place for them, thank you. I didn't do it myself because I didn't/don't particularly value their inclusion. The JPS 10:42, 11 December 2005 (UTC)00:10, January 24, 2007 Edit.Just to say that I've removed the boldened part of the following sentence......"The "clever" Baldrick character was ditched after the first series, '''most probably because it raised the question of "why doesn't Baldrick just plot to get rid of idiots such as Blackadder and take power himself?", a problem for which the first series does not present a solution (despite many situations in which it would be more beneficial to Baldrick to do so).'''"...... because it would have been extremely unlikely for an ex-dung shoveller to suddenly become King of a mediaeval, feudalist nation. The times being what they were, and all. I mean, everyone would have noticed, wouldn't they? Yes.User:Gardener of Geda|Gardener ;/font;of ;/font;Geda;/font;;/b; | Message Me.... 00:20, 24 January 2007 (UTC)22:40, September 08, 2007 Edit.Removed that Baldrick appears in all episodes.According to imdb he misses one in series 1.62.56.116.107 21:46, 8 September 2007 (UTC)Given that Tony Robinson as Baldrick is credited as six appearances in a six episode series, I feel that the missing episode is the unaired pilot, where Baldrick appeared but played by a different actor, and so Baldrick did appear in all episodes.Special:Contributions/202.173.191.90|202.173.191.90 (talk) 01:55, 12 December 2008 (UTC)Wilbur