Public domain resourceThis entry came from an old public domain resource.  Feel free to update ; expand it.  --KQFastest growing city in DenmarkÅRHUS IS BY FAR THE FASTEST GROWING CITY IN DENMARK AND CAN REACH 450.000 IN 25 YEARS ACUORDING TO SEVERAL IN ÅRHUS CITY COUNCIL:Politicians can't predict the future. Let's stick to the present. Valentinian (talk) / Special:Contributions/Valentinian|(contribs) 04:16, 24 December 2006 (UTC)The HORRIBLE Main ImageThe main image of Aarhus looks awful! It's such a nice city,so a nicer image should be used. I think a photo of the "River" in the centre would be much better, where you could see all the cafees and spainsh stairs. To be honest any image of Aarhus would be better! Can someone change it? ThanksIf you meant the ArhusCityFromHarbor pic, then 'done'. Either someone really liked pneumatic car ferry ramps or they really didn't like the Arhus article. Anarchangel (talk) 13:04, 13 January 2009 (UTC)DocumentationThe Article says that Aarhus have a metropolitan area of ca. 800.000 people.. I would like some documention on that one.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/80.162.251.107|80.162.251.107 (talk) 15:09, 30 March 2008 (UTC);;; ;;Phrase"Aarhus city holds almost 300.000 citizens but within a 30 minute drive, there lives around 700.000 people making it by far the second most populated area in Denmark after the Copenhagen area."Sounds a bit "tourist guide".I think the population count is rather like 280,000 (year 2002) than 218,000. User:BjarkeDahlEbertThe total number of people in Aarhus Kommune is 288.837 (year 2002) according to so 218.000 sounds correct for the city of Aarhus --User:TraxPlayerThe correct number of citizens in Århus is 228.547, as it is mentioned in the list of the largest Danish cities in the Danish Wikipedia. This number is the official one, although some Arhusians dont accept it. Please correct this someone.By the way, the 700.000 is more of a guess than a fact. The County of Aarhus holds some 680.000, but most of this area, such as Djursland, Randers and Silkeborg is more than half an hour drive from Aarhus.Anders SUser:LinkBot/suggestions/Aarhus|Link suggestionsAn automated Wikipedia link suggester has some possible wiki link suggestions for the Aarhus article, and they have been placed on User:LinkBot/suggestions/Aarhus|this page for your convenience.''Tip:'' Some people find it helpful if these suggestions are shown on this talk page, rather than on another page. To do this, just add  to this page. ;mdash; LinkBot 00:55, 18 Dec 2004 (UTC)Its area?The first sentence of the article states that "Århus (...) is the principal port and bishop's seat of ''its area'' of Denmark." The article may probably be clearer if the expression "''its area''" was replaced by what it means in reality: "Aarhus County"? "east coast of Jutland"? I suggest (but dunno if I am right)::'''Århus''', also spelled '''Aarhus''', is the principal port and bishop's seat of the east coast of Jutland, Denmark.Cheers. --Edcolins 07:50, August 29, 2005 (UTC)Kaospilot spam?I am wondering why the link to Kaospilot was removed? They are renown internationally. Peterssensigur 21:46, 10 October 2005 (UTC): I removed the external link as a "spam promotional link".  I looked at the website quickly, and there was nothing immediately that said that this was anything other than a spam promotional link, at least in this article.: Wikipedia is not meant to be a "web directory" for external links, and I am sure there are many other fine educational institutions in Aarhus and other locations that do not necessarily come onto lists of external links.  To me the Kaospilot link is neither characteristic or necessarily noteworth about Aarhus.  The other educational institutions listed at least make an attempt to write an article, even though two are still redlinks.: If Kaospilots is internationally known, then perhaps an article about it would be appropriate, so it was clear to the reader what it is, and why it is so important to Aarhus that it belongs in this article.  Personally, I think the external link would still belong on the Kaospilot article page and not here anyways.  Wikipedia style guide  page Wikipedia:External links will better explain what type of links belong where and why.  --SFDan 07:01, 11 October 2005 (UTC)The official websiteThe official webside of Aarhus city is ''not'' as quoted but Aarhus Kommune.(:-) Kurt L . Århus . DenmarkYep. I've corrected the websites, instead of phony 'official' sites, but in reality commercial sites, we now have a proper description. CraigThat's a bit of an unfair description. aarhus.dk is a perfectly respectable and useful portal. It's not "official" but I don't think anyone visiting it would mistake it for an official "kommune" site either. Special:Contributions/130.225.25.207|130.225.25.207 (talk) 09:02, 4 February 2009 (UTC): Hello. However phoney and commercial it appears, aarhus.dk ''is'' the official website/portal for Aarhus Municipality and citizens alike. The English version reads like a complete commercial advertisement, so I have linked to the Danish native version. That might help a little bit, but let us remember, that we cannot change the reality of things here on Wikipedia, we must simply reflect it.  RhinoMind (talk) 04:26, 19 March 2014 (UTC)Should the sports teams not be Mentioned?Agf for example —The preceding unsigned comment was added by 83.88.79.44 (talk • Special:Contributions/83.88.79.44|contribs) 14:27 14 May 2006 (UTC).;;;århus has 295,512 citizens in the (kommune) it is by far the fastest growing city in denmark and growing around 2.500 every year.  in 1980 it had 245,000 citizens and in 2006 295,512 and it will reach 300.000 in a couple of years.    if theres built enough buildings to hold the many people århus can reach 450.000 in 25 years. acourding to several of the people in the city council.:And so what? Speculation, hope and advertisement, that's what it is. That's all fine, but we cannot build a wikipedia article on that. BTW please sign comments or you might be ignored. RhinoMind (talk) 04:33, 19 March 2014 (UTC)What's a lokomotiv?"Aarhus is by far the biggest city in the region and will be the natural lokomotiv in the area."What's a lokomotiv? - Ireneshusband 01:08, 28 May 2006 (UTC):The Danish word for a train :) The English spelling is ''locomotive''. It is a pretty common metaphor to describe a strong force pulling something else forward. Valentinian (talk) / Special:Contributions/Valentinian|(contribs) 20:42, 2 October 2006 (UTC)NameAs far as I know, the primary official name for the city is Århus.. with the Å. "Aarhus" is an alternate accepted spelling. Therefore I am wondering why the main article is titled as per the alternative spelling.I have been to Denmark many times - and have had a Danish girlfriend - and can confirm that this is the case. I have been to Århus.. and the name as it appears on all signs in the city, is spelled with an Å.I intend to move the article to name Århus, with Aarhus being a redirect. If any Danish person thinks they know better and has any objection to this, please let me know here, with the reason. Thanks. EuroSong 11:09, 4 June 2006 (UTC):It is the same problem with Aarhus County. The confusion must be due to English speakers using the traditional spelling. Since the spelling reform of 1948, all official names are spelled with Å (so this includes both Århus, Ålborg, and Åbenrå.) The names of individual persons are normally spelled in the traditional way. In my opinion this and all similar examples should be moved to the version using Å (keeping the version using Aa as a redirect). After all, it has been the official spelling for almost 60 years. Valentinian (talk) 13:09, 4 June 2006 (UTC):: OK.. I shall do the move soon (leaving more time for any others to comment first) - but it has to be said that in the case of Aalborg, it should NOT be moved to Ålborg. Spelling reform aside, "Aalborg" is the primary official name of that city, as used by the city administration itself, and as appears on all road signs and in virtually all Danish books and newspapers. So although the spelling roots of Aalborg and Århus are the same, the current official usage differs - with Ålborg and Aarhus as accepted variants :) EuroSong 13:44, 4 June 2006 (UTC):::Ok, I'll like to hear more input on this one. I'm pretty sure Ålborg and Åbenrå are the only spellings officially recognized by ''Retskrivningsordbogen'' for these towns (although both of them often use the old spelling.) If anybody doesn't know already, ''Retskrivningsordbogen'' is the standard dictionary used in Danish schools. It is edited by the ''Dansk Sprognævn''. Regards. Valentinian (talk) 16:28, 4 June 2006 (UTC)::::With regard to Ålborg/Aalborg see . Basically, Dansk Sprognævn want you to use Ålborg but the government refuses to piss off the entire population of Aalborg by enforcing it. Special:Contributions/130.225.25.207|130.225.25.207 (talk) 09:10, 4 February 2009 (UTC):This should fall under Wikipedia:Naming conventions (use English). While the Danish name is "Århus", in English I have never seen it as anything else than "Aarhus". Likewise the Danish capital is at Copenhagen, not København. You might argue that Aarhus don't ''have'' an English name, but in that case we would still have to transliterate the Danish name, and we would end up with Arhus or Aarhus. You might also note that "Dansk Sprognævn" doesn't have 'jurisdiction' over the names of  cities and places - that falls under [Kulturministeriets Stednavneudvalg]. Rasmus (talk) 19:56, 4 June 2006 (UTC):: Hej Rasmus.. interesting viewpoint. But then do you also propose that all articles which use any letters which are not in the English language alphabet, be changed to use only English letters? So for example, Severina Vučković should be changed to "Severina Vuckovic" because English does not have č and ć? As far as I see it, both Vučković and Århus are the "proper names" of the person and city, and that proper naming should be maintaned. I think the Wikipedia convention applies to names which do have English versions, like Copenhagen and Kiev (Kyiv in Ukrainian). I did not know that "Aarhus" was an official English version... just a version of choice by English people who do not know how to make the Å on their keyboard :) What do you think? EuroSong 21:37, 4 June 2006 (UTC):::It is an ungoing discussion whether or not to include diacritics (see Wikipedia:Naming conventions (standard letters with diacritics)). However Å is not an A with a ring diacritic, it is a seperate vowel. A better comparison would be the German ß/ss or the Icelandic Þ/th. Anyway, the first question is whether or not "Aarhus" is the most common English name (whether a name is official has no bearing on the article-title. Kyiv is the official English spelling of the Ukrainian city Київ according to the Ukranian government). My contention, of course, is that it is. You might look at the official spellings of things with an English name: University of Aarhus, Aarhus School of Business, Aarhus Convention. Google hits should also give an indication: Aarhus 8,160,000 , Århus 777,000 , Arhus 306,000 , but of course this doesn't show us how many of the hits are due to people not knowing how to type the Å. Rasmus (talk) 12:18, 6 June 2006 (UTC):As a resident of Aarhus, I would recommend (based on my experience here with regard to the spelling) "Aarhus" for the English article, as this is standard whenever one can't or doesn't feel like typing the "Å".. but what really doesn't make any sense is the statement in the first line "sometimes referred to incorrectly as Århus".  Since that's obviously wrong, I'm changing it. Special:Contributions/86.52.53.95|86.52.53.95 (talk) 15:56, 21 June 2009 (UTC):Either both it should be Århus and Aalborg (danish use) in this article or Aarhus and Aalborg (more international). Right now there seems to be simultanous use of Aarhus and Århus (both referring directly to the city and to names containing the city name) as well as Aalborg and Ålborg. If nobody objects, at least I will change Ålborg to Aalborg.  NicolajBjerreNielsen (talk) 15:31, 4 November 2009 (UTC)The city of Aarhus is officially changing its name on Jan 1, 2011 to Aarhus, from Århus.  So that should end this discussion.  It is doing itto be more internationally accessible, and since so many institutions in town, like the university, use the Aarhus spelling.   Special:Contributions/212.242.235.174|212.242.235.174 (talk) 21:31, 13 October 2010 (UTC):Should I change it now? Special:Contributions/78.156.126.133|78.156.126.133 (talk) 18:48, 22 December 2010 (UTC): Yes please. All Å's should be changed to Aa, since the change 1/1 2011. Special:Contributions/130.225.22.254|130.225.22.254 (talk) 13:24, 17 January 2011 (UTC)The name audio-file is bad.Dead linkDuring several automated bot runs the following external link was found to be unavailable. Please check if the link is in fact down and fix or remove it in that case!* ** In Aarhus on 2007-01-05 23:50:07, 404 Not Found** In Aarhus on 2007-01-16 01:06:29, 404 Not Found--BezkingBot-Link 01:05, 9 January 2007 (UTC)IQ ComparisonAn article entry reads:''..This highly impacts on the regional IQ average, making Aarhus the provincial city with the highest average IQ in Denmark.[5]''The (provisional) reference contains a breakdown of IQ according to various vapid criteria. We learn, for instance, that the average Renault driver scores 13 more IQ points that the owner of an Austin (presumably an artifact of the small sample sets). Aarhus isn't examined explicitly, but apparently Ostjylland finds itself a couple of points behind Kobenhavn.Personally, I find the entry rather embarassing. What's the point, exactly? I'm removing the entry. If someone feels strongly about its inclusion, I hope they will put their views forward here first.--Philopedia (talk) 11:56, 21 November 2007 (UTC):Well, that bit about Aarhus residents being smarter than everyone else is back again; and without any discussion. I stand by my view that the comparison is inappropriate, but I refuse to participate in a reversion war. If other readers think the way I do, I hope they will speak up. Perhaps something can still be done.:--Philopedia (talk) 22:01, 26 November 2007 (UTC)I did not put the bit there again, but how ever I think it sounds good. Proberly becouse I am from Aarhus myself.--Urbanscape (talk) 13:14, 27 May 2008 (UTC)RatingsRated "C", needs to be supported more thoroughly by inline citations and "cn" tags need to be cleared; "High" importance due to regional significance. Folks at 137 (talk) 12:09, 13 July 2008 (UTC)Metro populationThe urban number is right, 239,000. But metro, 1.2 million? Where does that come from? The municipalty is 330,000 (Danish article) Medico80 (talk) 23:03, 15 May 2009 (UTC)Ugly articleI think this article needs to get pepped up if your know what I mean. Its boring, there is many failures - and the pictures are either awful or boring. Anyone?  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/62.243.180.25|62.243.180.25 (talk) 12:46, 8 August 2009 (UTC);; ;;Since when did you go around judging articles? Besides its the Wikipedia it doesnt have to be pretty for you to look at.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/96.237.12.253|96.237.12.253 (talk) 20:48, 19 August 2009 (UTC);; ;;Area for the urban areaIt says the urban area is 91 sq. km, but where does that information come from? Statistics Denmark does not calculate the area for urban areas. Also in 2011, Stavtrup has been added to Aarhus urban area.  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Christian2381 (talk • Special:Contributions/Christian2381|contribs) 10:18, 23 May 2011 (UTC);;; ;;Edit request from , 19 October 2011;;Intro: It's "East Jutland", not "Eat Jutland".;;Kristian78 (talk) 19:50, 19 October 2011 (UTC): Fixed, thank youZidanie5 (talk) 17:38, 21 October 2011 (UTC)Suggestions for further improvementsI have added a few expand-templates to the article, some with examples. I was inspired in part by the Copenhagen article. I have also put in suggestions and comments in several sections, that is only visible on the edit-page unfortunately, so I was encouraged to post them here as well. The suggestions reads:* '''Topgraphy'''. There is already some preliminary info on this in the geography section above. That info could be elaborated on and moved to this new section.* '''Environmental planning'''. Examples: On the CO2 neutrality polities and aims of the city, major environmental projects completed and perhaps those planned. See Copenhagen for more inspiration.* '''Economy'''. This section need an improvement, perhaps an expansion.* '''Landmarks'''. I suggest we expand this section and add information on the cityscape, and rename the section to Cityscape as well. Inspired by the Copenhagen article.* '''Culture'''. I suggest this section is expanded and divided into smaller sections. See the Copenhagen article for example.RhinoMind (talk) 20:28, 19 July 2014 (UTC):Thanks for these constructive suggestions. I'm glad you were inspired by Copenhagen which we recently managed to bring up to GA level. We are now trying to do the same with Aarhus. I've already implemented one or two of your suggestions and will continue to work on them. The article still suffers from the lack on in-line references. I'll continue to work on them but any assistance would be appreciated.--Ipigott (talk) 20:47, 19 July 2014 (UTC)On '''Education'''. Fine improvements! The section still misses this important network of schools:** with these two main departments in Aarhus: /[In Danish] and /. The Aarhus C campus is under construction at the moment and will combine several departments, that are now fragmented and spread across Aarhus.Just to let you know. Cheers! RhinoMind (talk) 02:55, 2 August 2014 (UTC)Climate section?I was wondering, if the article needs a climate section like the one we have up on the Copenhagen page?background:From what I have read, the area has a somewhat special local climate. For three main reasons. The most obvious '''one''' is, that Aarhus is a coastal city, so the summers are cooler and the winters warmer, than inland areas with the same latitude. The '''second''' reason is that the northern slopes of the Aarhus Ådal in the south, are increasing the solar influx, compared to a totally flat area. This is a well known phenomenon and the effects are most prominent in the temperate zones (or higher latitudes), where the consequences are that the earth is heated more than normal for the latitude. This is the reason why many agricultural fields in Scandinavia traditionally are placed on northern slopes (facing south that is), as the phenomenon increases the agricultural output. '''Thirdly''' the soil in the tunnel valley of Aarhus Ådal is very sandy, compared to the dense, nutritious and waterproof clay-rich soils of the moraine above. It is old sea floor and snail and mussel shells are everywhere in the soil actually. This has the consequences, that the soils in the valley drains easily and dries out quickly. It is also heated much quicker by the Sun and plants are flowering about two weeks earlier here than normally in the spring for example. This might be seen as just curiosities, but I will find sources if it is judged as important information. RhinoMind (talk) 17:18, 22 July 2014 (UTC):Yes, a section on climate would be good. Some basic info is available [here]. DMI should also have data.--Ipigott (talk) 19:55, 23 July 2014 (UTC)Orphaned references in :AarhusI check pages listed in :Category:Pages with incorrect ref formatting to try to fix reference errors. One of the things I do is look for content for User:AnomieBOT/docs/OrphanReferenceFixer|orphaned references in wikilinked articles. I have found content for some of :Aarhus's orphans, the problem is that I found more than one version. I can't determine which (if any) is correct for ''this'' article, so I am asking for a sentient editor to look it over and copy the correct ref content into this article.Reference named "dsd":;/b;From Aalborg: ;/li;From Esbjerg: ;/li;From Odense: ;/li;;/ul;I apologize if any of the above are effectively identical; I am just a simple computer program, so I can't determine whether minor differences are significant or not. AnomieBOTUser talk:AnomieBOT|⚡;/font; 13:43, 24 July 2014 (UTC)For anyone interested in bot output, these are not identical. It's just my easy way of identifying Den Store Danske refs.--Ipigott (talk) 20:56, 24 July 2014 (UTC)Environmental planningI have moved the following discussion here, from my personal page. RhinoMind (talk) 17:25, 27 July 2014 (UTC)In response to your suggestion, I've added a few lines under this heading but I have unfortunately found very little in the way of achievement. Maybe you can help, either by adding directly to the article or providing me with pertinent sources.--Ipigott (talk) 13:59, 25 July 2014 (UTC):Hi Ipi. I added the section inspired by the Copenhagen article and because I know it is a serious issue for Denmark and Aarhus not the least. I do not have any overview of current or completed initiatives, but I have a few ideas of headlines that could be followed up.::* CO-neutrality:* Waste mangement:* Recycling:** recycling centres:** recycling of household garbage:** industrial recycling:* Water:**Drinking Water. Safeguarding, treatment, etc..:**Water treatment:**Dealing with the increasing precipitation (Egå Engsø, rainwater reservoirs):* Buildings:** Implementation of environmentally friendly technologies and construction standards. (Electricity, heat, water treatment):* Traffic.:I will see if I can find good startingpoints.:RhinoMind (talk) 09:32, 26 July 2014 (UTC)::Found a solid fix-point here: [Go Green With Aarhus]. English available. More later. RhinoMind (talk) 09:44, 26 July 2014 (UTC)::On CO2 neutrality. An offshore wind turbine farm has been planned, financed and accepted for construction at Mejl Flak in the Bay of Aarhus. RhinoMind (talk) 16:07, 26 July 2014 (UTC)::Thanks for all your feedback on this. I would however really appreciate information about the specific progress Aarhus has made on the issue over the past few years. Please feel free to add to the section if you have sources.--Ipigott (talk) 21:06, 26 July 2014 (UTC):::Hi. I believe there is plenty of information on the site I provided, but I can give a few examples that I will follow up with good links:::: - Egå Engsø. I was created in 2006 by removing drainage and pumps in parts of the Egå Valley to the north of Aarhus. The lake then created itself of the next few years and became a popular nature site and important spot for birds. The lake is described in more detail on its own page with many links on the details, but the two main reasons was: To create a rainwater reservoir that can deal with the increasing precipitation in Denmark as a consequence of the changing climate. To deal with eutrophication, especially nitrates and phosphor.::: - Many rainwater basins has been built in the recent decade in Aarhus. They are usually underground constructions and were built for two man reasons: To deal with the increasing precipitation as a consequence of the changing climate. To clean surface runoff water from toxic substances (from roads, etc.). A large basin can be seen here: [File:Skovtoften 2.jpg]. It is underground and only reveal itself from to many tubes and hatches.::: - Brabrand Lake|Årslev Engsø (see also :da:Årslev Engsø|Årslev Engsø) was created in 2003 for mainly two reasons: To ease to nutrient burden of Brabrand Lake and the Bay of Aarhus. Primarily nitrates and phosphor. To create a new wetland area, a habitat type under serious threat in Denmark (and Europe).::: - The construction of new buildings are regulated according to specific guidelines. They are better isolated to prevent excessive heatloss and hence more CO2 friendly. They often use recycled material. They often incorporates solar panels. Etc.. I will try to find specific documents on these guidelines and good representive example buildings. Many old buildings have also been renovated to these new standards. a good example is :da:Skovgårdsparken|Skovgårdsparken.::: - The company of "Aarhus Vand" has just completed a very large water treatment project spanning from Brabrand Lake to the bay of Aarhus. The project had a huge budget and several goals like: Dealing with the increasing precipitation due to the changing climate. Providing fresh, clean and safe drinking water for the future.::: - The New Forests of Aarhus has been planted and raised since the late 1980ies around Aarhus.::: RhinoMind (talk) 17:53, 27 July 2014 (UTC)'''Links'''*[Go Green With Aarhus]. English available. From the discussion above. A solid fix-point.*[Aarhus Vand] (English available). A good link about water treatment and strategies in and around Aarhus. Concrete examples.* (perhaps English?). From Aarhus municipality. A good overview of policies and administrative responsibilities and links to the many subsections of the environment.  RhinoMind (talk) 18:54, 27 July 2014 (UTC)*. an English site with many interesting links to plans, concrete projects, business opportunities, policies, etc., in Aarhus, as seen in a national context. From the national web-site of State of Green:  RhinoMind (talk) 20:14, 27 July 2014 (UTC):I have implemented some of the information on the page now. There s more to be added, but I think the framework is up now. The in-line referencing should be improved also. RhinoMind (talk) 19:49, 27 July 2014 (UTC)Deletion of a paragraphThe following paragraph was deleted from the article by User:Anosmoman:In 1998, the Protocol on Heavy Metals was adopted in Aarhus, and had 36 signatories by 2004. The protocol addresses the reduction of cadmium, lead and mercury emissions in the interests of environmental protection.RefsI agree that it was perhaps misplaced in the '''History: 20th century – present''' section. But perhaps we should move/introduce it to the '''Environmental Planning''' section instead? What do you think? RhinoMind (talk) 19:38, 15 November 2014 (UTC)A way to simplifyIf some sections turns out to flood with (important) information, like politics and administration can have a tendency to do, we could perhaps consider to move some of it to the Aarhus Municipality page. It will perhaps require a thorough reading to decide what to move and what to keep, but I think this could be a "window to simplification" to consider in the long run. Thought I would mention it. RhinoMind (talk) 21:30, 28 July 2014 (UTC):We can perhaps move some of it but it is important to have a politics and admin section in the Aarhus article too. Maybe you can help us to improve coverage of the city council (if it differs from the municipality).--Ipigott (talk) 05:57, 29 July 2014 (UTC)Important bandsHi. Many important bands were removed from the Notable people section. Probably because they are bands and not individuals?They are however important to the musical scene in Aarhus and to the self-image of the city not the least. They represent both the modern and international musical engagement. Could they be added to the culture section? Or is there a better place for them?Previously the Culture section was divided into subsections (see also talks above), should this be re-introduced also? If no, why not?RhinoMind (talk) 13:10, 31 July 2014 (UTC):Problem was fixed soon after. RhinoMind (talk) 19:31, 15 November 2014 (UTC)A question about referencingI was curious as to why references had been inserted for issues and people with their own wiki-page? As I see it, this is ref-overkill. Everything is explained and sourced on the wiki-pages themselves, so why is the sources also put into this article? I dont understand it.However, I have encountered this (to me weird) procedure elsewhere, so maybe there is a good reason, that I am just not aware of? Is it something you have thought about? What do you say?RhinoMind (talk) 13:20, 31 July 2014 (UTC):It is a requirement for GA...♦ User talk:Dr. Blofeld|''Dr. Blofeld'' 06:12, 1 August 2014 (UTC)::Thanks! I guess I can't argue with that :-) At least I aired my opinion. RhinoMind (talk) 00:44, 2 August 2014 (UTC)::For your information. Notablity (and other vital informations) of writers can usually be obtained through this international website: [WorldCat Identities] by OCLC RhinoMind (talk) 02:14, 2 August 2014 (UTC)On Notable peopleSee Dr. Blofeld wrote in an edit that we should "stick to people born in Aarhus". Why is that exactly?Ipigott and I touched the subject above, primarily because I am and has been confused what would actually qualify or disqualify a specific notable person to be mentioned an the page of a city. Is there objective criteria for this? If so can someone (Dr. Blofeld) link to them, so I can read more? I really wanna know.As I see it, Notable people on a city's page would be people who have contributed to this particular citys' self-image, its culture, its development and so forth. People who are born in another city and sooner or later moved to Aarhus fx, to write books about Aarhus, to make movies featuring Aarhus, to describe events and time epochs based in Aarhus would indeed qualify to be mentioned as notable people on the Aarhus page fx.. Isn't it like this on other cities pages? People who was born somewhere else, but lived their life in Aarhus would - again as I see it - also qualify to be mentioned even if their work is not centred around Aarhus in particular. Am I right? Can you give some inputs on this discussion please, because this is important before the section on Notable people becomes an irrelevant list. RhinoMind (talk) 00:24, 1 August 2014 (UTC):If they spent their whole life or the bulk of their life in Aarhus then yeah, I agree they should probably be included. Some of the ones I removed I read the bios and they'd lived in other cities and didn't really seem worth mentioning. If you have sources to indicate otherwise please readd them. I don't think rock bands qualify as "people" though, I'd move them and mention them in culture..♦ User talk:Dr. Blofeld|''Dr. Blofeld'' 06:11, 1 August 2014 (UTC):: Ok good. I'll look into reintroductions if needed. I had hoped for info/links to "Notable people" criteria, if they exist that is. It has been a recurring issue for me personally, and many other WPns think. It would be nice to know, if there were a consensus about it or not, but I haven't found anything yet unfortunately. RhinoMind (talk) 00:39, 2 August 2014 (UTC)Image requests?Hi everybody. In relation to the current run for GA, I am open to specific image requests for this particular article or Aarhus in general, as I happen to live in the city. Please post your request below and I will see what I can do. RhinoMind (talk) 00:53, 2 August 2014 (UTC):Some of the hotels and restaurants might be useful. Also some photos of the Aarhus International Jazz Festival, I think you're a few weeks late for it though!♦ User talk:Dr. Blofeld|''Dr. Blofeld'' 20:03, 2 August 2014 (UTC)::Aawww yeah the Jazzfestival was just a week ago or so and I didn't even attend it really (no money) and haven't got any pics either. There is a Category:Restaurants in Aarhus and Category:Hotels in Aarhus up on Wiki Commons. I have added quite a few to the restaurants cat, but could add even more of course and the hotels cat could also be improved quite a bit. Any specific hotels or restaurants, let me know. Thanks for the inputs. RhinoMind (talk) 22:39, 2 August 2014 (UTC)::I have uploaded quite a few photos of restaurants and some hotels now. I have also uploaded a couple of photos from the 2014 Aarhus Fest. More will follow in these categories, I just have to sort them out and pick the best ones. RhinoMind (talk) 18:03, 26 November 2014 (UTC)About hotelsHello. I have reworked the section on hotels in the city. Some places dont exist no more and some new notable hotels have been added very recently. In addition I wrote a few introductory lines to set the business in perspective and describe the overall situation, instead of just a random list of hotel names. The section still misses a bit on the private Bed ; Breakfast offers. I will add something later (see here fx. ).'''Hotel Philip --; Ferdinand'''The acclaimed Restaurant Prins Ferdinand in ''Den Gamle By'' closed in 2010. Marc Rieper and his wife sold Hotel Philip and the associated café in 2008 to the owners of Restaurant Prins Ferdinand and the place is now known as Ferdinand. The concept is somewhat similar but on a larger premises. The Restaurant Prins Ferdinand is now a Café.RhinoMind (talk) 23:45, 7 August 2014 (UTC)CeresbyenI've added a cn tag for this: "gradually expanding into what became known as Ceresbyen (''The CeresCity'')", as I can see no mention of that in the sources cited ("CeresCity" in English seems to be only the cool marketing name of the new development on the old site, so if the claim can be confirmed, I'd recommend not omitting the expected space in the translation here). Belle (talk) 01:33, 10 August 2014 (UTC): Great and thanks for writing out your concerns in text here. I was curious as to which specific part of the text you felt was missing citation, so thanks. The gradual development of the place is thoroughly documented, so that part is not discussed here. That the place became known as Ceresbyen is documented later in the article and if this is the issue, we could copy a ref from there. I agree that CereCity is a marketing stunt and a more neutral translation should be ''The Ceres City'', when not discussing the current redevelopment project specifically. I think we could agree on that?:I will try to rephrase the sentence and copy a ref. RhinoMind (talk) 22:25, 10 August 2014 (UTC):Actually CeresByen ''is'' the official name of the place now . The commercial and the public/governmental spheres are very often mixed in Aarhus/Denmark and I have experienced this to be quite upsetting to foreigners. I think I understand why, but this is the reality here. Many of the English translations/versions of the municipality's' outreach are extremely commercial in their tone and points of view. I can understand if people find this disturbing, but this is the reality nevertheless... (see discussions above about this issue fx.). I am - however - not going to write it CeresByen or CeresCity, as the place has been referred to as Ceresbyen in local media also. RhinoMind (talk) 22:46, 10 August 2014 (UTC):Ok, I have replaced Ceresbyen with Ceres-grunden in the History section, to be more neutral and also put in a solid ref. I introduced Ceresbyen in the Economy section instead. In a few years, everybody will be using the name Ceresbyen or CeresByen, so we can change things later on. RhinoMind (talk) 23:12, 10 August 2014 (UTC)I also added a cn tag for the development of the port but this was removed with no explanation (the first four sentences of that section are not referenced Belle (talk) 10:55, 10 August 2014 (UTC):Hi Belle. Even though I wasn't the one removing your tag, I think I can explain it. The text sums up a large amount of information that is either explained in detail later in the paragraph (and ref'ed!) or evidenced on independent pages like Aarhus Docklands or :da:Aarhus Havn to name a couple. I think you are a bit near-sighted here. I have wiki-linked to Aarhus Docklands in the article now to give some directions that could be helpful.:If there is anything specifically you miss refs on (not citations!), please post some comments below. You are of course also welcome to research and put them up yourself. Let me also remind you (un-patronizingly), that generally there is no need to distrust well-worded information ''per se'', that is not particularly constructive or helpful really. If you feel specific refs are needed, just go and find them, they will most likely be out there and easy to spot usually. ''That'' is helpful. RhinoMind (talk) 23:37, 10 August 2014 (UTC)::I really don't know what to say to that; I suppose you'd better ignore my earlier comments. Belle (talk) 00:48, 11 August 2014 (UTC)A technical questionHello all tech savvies. I have experienced, that oftentimes web-links includes ['s, especially on bi-lingual sites. This poses a problem, when we wants to use these links as refs or sources here on WP. the square-backets a misunderstood by WP and leads to errors like ref 14 here in this article. What can we do about this ? Is there a way to solve the problem?RhinoMind (talk) 15:33, 15 August 2014 (UTC):Like [//en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aarhus;diff=621388036;oldid=621382982 this]? (Solution found [here].) ;mdash;;thinsp;User:Hhhippo|'''HHHIPPO;''';/font; 18:42, 15 August 2014 (UTC):: Ah thanks a lot HHIPPO. Perhaps WP had their own solution? Anyway, it is very useful info about the HTML coding! RhinoMind (talk) 21:40, 15 August 2014 (UTC)History or Economics?Hello. I have supplied a bit of information on the economic development of Aarhus. Some is in the history section, while other parts are in the Economics section. I think perhaps something from the Economics section could be moved to the history section, where it would fit better? I am unsure if the Economics should feature historical info or just how the present situation is?RhinoMind (talk) 18:46, 20 August 2014 (UTC)Warning issuedI have now issued a warning to User:Anosmoman, voicing concerns about his recent heavy edits, deletions and false information. We can discuss below if necessary. RhinoMind (talk) 17:11, 20 December 2014 (UTC): I will happily address any issues you bring to my attention. Anosmoman (talk) 19:22, 20 December 2014 (UTC):: Great. I am sorry if the wording of my post come across a little harsh, but the message is important and we need to discuss a few things. Most things are small-scale stuff, but important nevertheless. As a prelude I have posted a couple of issues on your talk-page. I would also like to point out, that in your edits on the "Sports" section, a lot of previous information has been deleted. RhinoMind (talk) 02:42, 21 December 2014 (UTC):: I am not sure I will have all the time I need for this in the coming weeks, but for now I am thankful that discussions are initiated and people have a place to post concerns. I will post more on mine later. Merry Christmas and a happy New Year to all. RhinoMind (talk) 02:48, 21 December 2014 (UTC):::I realize you have spent much time on this article and sweeping changes can be frustrating. My objective from the onset have been to improve the article with the purpose of getting it to FA status and eventually on the front page for the Capital of Culture event in 2017. Obviously there's plenty of time so it's enitrely my fault for not engaging with the long-standing editors and using a more consensual, gradual approach. It's is an important discussion because we obviously all need to agree in what direction to go. The problem in my eyes has been a lack of focus. Since you mentioned the cuisine section I will use this as a starting off point to explain my thinking.:::This is the original section::::--------------------:::Restaurants are numerous in Aarhus and the city presents quality cooking of a large variety and from many places in the world. There are several appraised high end gourmet restaurants serving an international cuisine, like Fredrikshøj, Restaurant Varna, Miró, Nordisk Spisehus, Det Glade Vanvid, La Pyramide, Restaurant ET or Dauphine, all considered among the best in Denmark, together with a broad selection of similar cuisines of a high quality at places like Klassisk Fisk, Pihlkjær, Substans, 65 klassisk, Ferdinand, Mellemrum, Canblau, ART Restaurant, Mefisto or L'estragon. Many restaurants in Aarhus are closed for a number of weeks in the summertime, but still plenty of kitchens are serving.:::Aarhus is packed with cafés and bars of all kinds and for all economic capacities. Most cafés offers some kind of dining and some includes a restaurant like Café Casablanca, Café Carlton, Café Cross or Gyngen for example. Several cafés, bars and taverns cater for night revellers, especially from Thursday til Sunday morning. The riverside has plenty of options, but the night can also be spent or celebrated at many other spots around the city, including the modern Train dance club and music venue, Thorups Kælder, an underground bar in a cellar founded by Cisternian monks in the 13th century, Café Under Masken, next to the Royal Hotel, with iron sculptures designed by local artist Hans Krull, the relaxed Ris Ras Filliongongong in Mejlgade, with an award winning beer selection and offering waterpipes, the wine and book café of Løve's in Nørregade and Sherlock Holmes, a British-style pub with live music close to the City Hall, to name a few established and well known places. The brew pub of Sct. Clemens with A Hereford Beefstouw restaurant is also of interest.:::--------------------:::It's useful to look at FAs to determine best practices and get a feel for what is generally included and what isn't. Manchester, Boston Belgrade, Dhaka, Seattle, Istanbul, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Cleveland, Ann Arbor, Michigan are featured city articles. I have not cherry picked these – it's genuinely random picks so absolutely look at others too. Two of them have a section devoted to cuisine talking about customs specific to that region. A couple have single paragraphs, also very general. None of them list restaurants and these are, relative to Aarhus, big cities with famous chefs and venues. Copenhagen lists restaurants in context of michelin stars but it's not common on Wikipedia. Of course that doesn't mean we can't have a section or paragraphs devoted to food in Aarhus but I really feel we need to be critical of what to include and ensure information provides the reader with real insight about the subject matter: Aarhus. Does a list of venues provide the reader with useful information that couldn't be more appropriately supplied through a dining or travel guide or a Cuisine in Aarhus article?:::I wanted to shift the focus of the section to things that are unique or special to the area from the perspective of an en.wiki reader. What kind of food is specific to this place. What venues are unique or notable to the local culture. In general I'm opposed to listing venues in part because it's not maintainable – for instance I just noticed Ris Ras Filliongongong is closed – and in part because an article about the city should deal with the subject matter on a general level. I searched for food local to Aarhus or East Jutland but it doesn't seem like there is any. Instead I supplied a paragraph about older venues in an attempt to establish notability and a paragraphs about street food to supply some variety. I trimmed the section because we're writing a lot on the subject relative to smaller articles about much larger cities.:::This has been the basis for my edit but obviously I accept that it might not be the right direction to go in. I agree that the section currently deals more with "Food and Drink" than "Cuisine". Please don't take any of this as snark - I'm open to the discussion and will accept whatever direction we can agree on Anosmoman (talk) 08:06, 21 December 2014 (UTC):::: Ok this makes some sense of it all. At least you had a constructive plan about it all, although I (and other editors) might not agree with every edit.::::I would like to present a quick overview of the articles history and '''what we have learned from the editing-process''' so far, in order to facilitate future constructive discussions and avoid too many misunderstandings, etc.. User:Ipigott and User:Dr. Blofeld was instrumental in bringing the article to the current GA level, just a few months ago. We (and a few others) have worked on it since last spring 2014. We was looking at the Copenhagen article to find a way and structure for the article. I supplied much of the information, especially information that is very hard to get in English or from just an outside perspective on the city. I have also written many "supportive articles" in relation to Aarhus (like Skjoldhøjkilen, Marselisborg Forests, Brabrand Lake and Aarhus N to mention a few). I am Danish by birth, was born and raised in the city of Aarhus and currently lives here as well. Ipigott and Dr. Bofeld moved on to improve the Randers article, as they was bent on raising the quality of the articles on major Danish cities overall.::::There are several important issues that we have learned in the editing-process, that I would like to share:::::* A lot of the information available in English is out-dated or skewed towards tourists only and not so much about the actual situation of and in the city and how life is here outside the season and the tourist-traps. We should look beyond the candy-floss and the sugar coating to provide a balanced image as best we can.::::* Simple Google searches will not deliver what is relevant or irrelevant to put in the article. If the search is broadened to include Danish sources, of course this will improve the natural bias and straighten out the distortions somewhat, but still the on-line versions of stuff about Aarhus is not correlated 1-1 with the physical reality. This is a standing problem with just about every issue on Wikipedia perhaps, but it is much more relevant for things and places outside the English speaking spheres.::::* Aarhus Municipality has invested large sums of money in order to "sell the city" to foreigners. To attract students, to improve business relations, to attract foreign investments, to carve a place for the city in the international society, to win competitions (like Capital of Culture 2017 fx.). This public-private enterprise can often make it really hard to distinguish what is commercial propaganda and what is real solid information. I can give many examples.::::* Aarhus is changing extremely fast these years. This can make it very hard to be updated about what is actually going on. What closes down, what is restructured, what is being build, and so on. Even for a Danish person living in the city.::::All this being said (and shared), I would gladly participate in raising the quality to FA level. But as you point out yourself, some consensus on the process would really do good, so let me comment on your strategy:::::I see your points about '''lists''' and has actually also been trying to rewrite some of the lists into general readable text. I had plans for the night-life section and would have rewritten the list into text mentioning the areas presenting the options and perhaps discussing the diversity of these options overall. This would say a lot more, than just some list. But bear in mind, that the venues mentioned was carefully selected to show the diversity, notability and relevance. So instead of deleting lists, they should be reconsidered and rewritten into something more general and more useful. This is much more constructive.::::I do not agree with your agenda of writing the article from '''an English tourist perspective'''. This will give a skewed image of the city and since Wikipedia (en) is not a special British Wikipedia, but an international one, I object strongly. As an example of what kind of problems this direction will bring, I would mention the "cuisine" that you are also talking about. Being Danish and living in the city I do not see a plethora of Danish cuisine restaurants. On the contrary. When I go out, I see gourmet restaurants serving an international cuisine, each one inspired by all kinds of ethnic cuisines. I see Thai, Chinese, Greek, Italian restaurants. I see sandwhich, brunch and vegetarian cafés. Falaffel, dürum, kebab. And so on. Diversity as in most major cities. Very few places serves traditional Danish meals. So to write about traditional Danish cuisine, first thing in a cuisine section would give a wrong and skewed impression about reality here. In fact it would be an anachronistic insult. The globalization has made its imprint almost everywhere for the last 40 years and Denmark is no exception. Danish cuisine could (and should) be described in the Danish Cuisine article specifically. That being said, traditional Danish cuisine has seen a revival in the last 10 years or so. The places mentioned (''Raadhuus Kafeen'', ''Teater Bodega'', etc.) are popular, but they do not dominate the market in any way.::::About '''false information'''. I think we can agree that false information should be corrected and best of all, avoided in the first place by using solid sources up to date. I will of course continue to point out the mistakes.::::*I have already posted some examples on you talk page. ''Raadhuus Kafeen'' is not the oldest restaurant in Aarhus.::::*No ''Ris Ras Filliongongong'' is not closed. If you have read anything about it, it must have been that their cellar-department was closed due to safety concerns.::::Let us discuss more about the direction. I hope my first reply here will be found useful and informative in this respect.::::RhinoMind (talk) 16:50, 21 December 2014 (UTC):::::I haven't abandoned the discussion but Christmas season is a little hectic. You make valid points and I agree with most of it. Just to be clear I don't want to write the article for English tourists but rather for readers of an English Encyclopedia. False information is obviously unacceptable. It wasn't my intention to state that they were ''the'' oldest in the city - it was genuinely poor wording. That doesn't make it ok of course it just turns the problem into something else. I'll post a suggestion for a different version of that section in the coming days Anosmoman (talk) 06:32, 24 December 2014 (UTC)what about the filmcity?... and the fact that aarhus once was worlds most filmproducing city - well that was early on -  before film came with sound...  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/188.177.148.138|188.177.148.138 (talk) 23:06, 9 February 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:D  —Preceding unsigned comment added by Special:Contributions/188.177.148.138|188.177.148.138 (talk) 23:16, 9 February 2015 (UTC);;; ;;:Interesting, thanks for sharing. There is actually a place called Filmbyen (lit.: ''the film-city''). It is located at the harbour, 4-5 stories tall building, complete with studios and all. Several film companies are based in the city. Aarhus hosts several film festivals of a broad variety, including short-films. There are media and film educations also. I don't know if it should go in the article, but just wanted to share some updated info on present times. RhinoMind (talk) 20:28, 10 February 2015 (UTC)The sound-file is brokenThe sound-file for Aarhus in the beginning of the article is broken. The "s" is missing from the pronunciation.I remember playing the sound-file some months ago, and it was working fine. RhinoMind (talk) 20:24, 10 February 2015 (UTC)Semi-protected edit request on 23 October 2015;;Please change 'Aarhus City Hall tower from 1942, designed by Hack Kampmann' to 'Aarhus City Hall tower from 1942, designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller because it is incorrect.Thank you!;;Mrnnpdrsn (talk) 15:13, 23 October 2015 (UTC)- Thanks for providing references - Arjayay (talk) 17:55, 24 October 2015 (UTC)