#FFCCCC02 June 2009;;HitlerWhy are there no hyperlinks to Adolf HitlerFounder of Fascism?Wasn't Mussolini the founder of the fascism? Have you studied history?--User:115ash|'''115ash'''User talk:115ash|'''→(☏)''';/i; 10:20, 7 September 2015 (UTC):No, Mussolini did not found Fascism, he founded Italian Fascism. Fascism as ideology was born before WWI. Please read Fascism#History. Alex2006 (talk) 11:25, 7 September 2015 (UTC)::The Italian one was the first one. I've also provided 2 sources. I can include more, if you want, and pls try to respond on you talk page, as you don't have this habit. ?--User:115ash|'''115ash'''User talk:115ash|'''→(☏)''';/i; 11:26, 7 September 2015 (UTC):::There is a difference between a political movement and the ideology behind it. For example: Marx and Engels (and others) are the minds behind Communism as ideology, while Lenin founded Russian Communism. We cannot say that Lenin founded Communism, although Russia was the first country to experience a communist government. About talk pages, it is usage in an exchange of opinions that each user writes on the page of the other. Alex2006 (talk) 11:39, 7 September 2015 (UTC)::::I accept sources like BBC. The word "fascism" was invented by him. --User:115ash|'''115ash'''User talk:115ash|'''→(☏)''';/i; 11:54, 7 September 2015 (UTC):::::I agree that it's difficult to make such a bold, unqualified statement, not least because, as noted, the term "fascism" covers quite a broad range of things. It can refer to a quasi-ideology or a movement, and is also applied, sometimes retrospectively, to ideas and groups in different countries that shared features but often had limited direct connection. Although Mussolini would be a candidate, it's debatable if any one person can be said to have founded fascism per se. In one sense it's arguably correct; equally it's meaningless. And given that the second para already acknowledges, with a little more precision, that he "founded the fascist movement [in Italy]", it's also repetitious to the extent that it is true. As for sources, given the first point, I am sure that some can be found that make the assertion claimed; as for those currently cited, none appear to be top-tier authorities. In any event, the History.com site only talks about him founding the Italian fascist party, as does the BBC site in the main text (as opposed to the brief headline) – ie the statement that the page already has without this addition. There's no preview on the book cited, so I can't check what that says. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';08:56, 8 September 2015 (UTC)::::::I agree with you, N-HH and I think that at present there is no consensus for this addition. The book that you are mentioning was already there in the previous version of the article, where  Mussolini was defined to be "one of the key figures in the creation of fascism". The editor who added  references to bbc and History.com left this source in place, and this is wrong. Alex2006 (talk) 06:33, 9 September 2015 (UTC):::::::I think Mussolini  was the founder of fascism. There were indeed many intellectual tendencies before him, but he was the one who pulled them together and made it an actual operating, unified force. The RS say so. 1) Thomas F. X. Noble, ‎Barry Strauss, ‎Duane Osheim ''Western Civilization''- 2007 - ‎"Benito Mussolini The founder of fascism" ; 2) ''Mussolini and Italian Fascism'' by Borden W. Painter - 1980 - ‎p 7  the "Founder of Fascism"; 3) Richard L. Greaves - 1993 - ‎"Mussolini. The founder of Fascism was born in 1883"; 4) ''Mussolini's Cities'' - Page 9 " Mussolini founded fascism in a profoundly ):::::::::As noted, of course sources can be found that say "Mussolini founded fascism", and it is arguably true in one sense; but it remains a subjective assertion to some extent on the part of those authors and also depends somewhat on what is meant by fascism. No, random WP editors shouldn't usually argue with sources, but there is a judgment to be made about both what they are actually saying and how to present material derived from them. The page already said in the second para that he "founded" the Italian fascist movement, and the original wording of the first para, before it was switched to the bolder statement, was that he "was one of the key figures in the creation of fascism". That both seems less repetitive and tallies with the information in the sources cited above. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';09:33, 9 September 2015 (UTC):::::::::N-HH is relying on what RS??? he seems highly subjective in rejecting all the scholars who are very explicit and objective on the matter. Rjensen (talk) 00:25, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::::::::::I think that here we are mixing two things: for sure Mussolini founded Italian Fascism (the movement), but the ideology behind it predates him. This is also clear from some of the references  modern and very urban geographical context."; 5) ''The Totalitarian Experiment in Twentieth Century Europe'' by David Roberts - 2006 p 446: "Mussolini personally founded Fascism and, despite the frustrations he quickly encountered, he had the stature when he did so, in 1919, to make a credible effort to rally a new, possibly revolutionary political force"; 6) ''Fascist Voices: An Intimate History of Mussolini's Italy'' by Christopher Duggan - 2013 - ‎Page 213: "On 23 March 1919 the Duce founded Fascism...."; 7) ''The Rise of Fascism in Europe'' by George P. Blum - 1998 -Page 5: "March 1919 he founded fascism with the establishment of the first Fascio di Combattimento (combat group) in Milan".  etc etc—Preceding unsigned comment added by Rjensen (talk • Special:Contributions/Rjensen|contribs) 07:26, 9 September 2015‎  (UTC);;;::::::::That seems convincing. I agree that Fascism#History points to fascism actually being created by/from a variety of sources, it seems WP:ORish to use that to contradict those explicit WP:RS statements cited by Rjensen - unless, of course someone can produce an RS that does explicitly contradict them. DeCausa (talk) 08:01, 9 September 2015 (UTCabove, for example: "On 23 March 1919 the Duce founded Fascism...." That's why I think that the introduced sentence is ambiguous: founder of the Fascist movement, party and regime: yes, indeed. Founder of the Fascist Ideology: no (Mussolini was all except and ideologist). Alex2006 (talk) 05:28, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::::::::::::Mussolini selected elements A-C-F-I-M-S from different people, discarded other elements, and rearranged them into what he named FASCISM.  He spent a lot of his energy on defining this ideology. Rjensen (talk) 06:28, 10 September 2015 (UTC):::::::::::::Mussolini had neither the time nor the culture (being only a journalist without a formal education) to define his own ideology. The theoretical section of the basic work about fascist ideology, "La dottrina del Fascismo" was written by Gentile, not by him. Fundamentally he was a great tactician and pragmatist, interested only in gaining and maintaining its power, and he needed something to justify it. Enlightening about that are the conversations which he held with Julius Evola about fascist ideology, reported in De Felice's ''Mussolini'': at the end he wrote: "Maybe from him I got what I need" (that is, the ideological framework which he needed). Alex2006 (talk) 07:00, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::Mussolini had the time, the training, and the energy to be an intellectual. Bosworth's biography (2002) opens with a peroration on his protagonist's status as an intellectual [p 1]. Bosworth repeatedly calls him a teacher [p55], an intellectual [p58, 59], a "professore" (p 59), a member of the "chattering classes" (p 59). He "Aggressively willed himself to be in intellectual among the intellectuals" (59). he learned German ; French  ; attended the lectures at Lausanne University of perhaps the leading social scientist in Europe, Pareto. [p 60]. He helped translate an essay by Prince Kropotkin [p 64]; He read the socialist classics and related intellectual works like Darwin's [p 66, 171]; He published short stories, ; essays on poetry, and  Nietzsche among others [p 68]. He kept up his intellectual activity as Prime Minister (p 338) Rjensen (talk) 08:15, 10 September 2015 (UTC)He did not have the intellectual stature of Gentile, of course, But he certainly had enough intellectual firepower to edit the leading socialist newspaper on daily basis and to  assemble the ideas that be came fascism.Rjensen (talk) 08:15, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::: - which is the standard work about him - explains at length his educational ''cursus''. Mussolini was a "maestro elementare", that is a primary school teacher, with all the limitations of this kind of education in 1900s Italy. And Mussolini was a journalist, and a great journalist, but a journalist is not necessarily an intellectual. You can understand this just by browsing the list of the books which he read in his youth: he was intelligent, curious, but lacked of method, so was impossible for him to achieve a decent degree of culture. Unfortunately for you, ignoring the Italian works on this subject (above all De Felice's work, with its over 4,000 pages and the myriads of documents is unsurpassed), and only relying upon outdated foreign sources ( the story about "Mussolini attending the lectures of Pareto" has been clarified 45 years ago by De Felice, and is incredible that 40 years later there is still people in the academy writing such crap) is impossible to understand the figure of the "Duce" and writing something meaningful here. About his knowledge of languages, he knew French decently because of his emigration in Switzerland, but he never understood well German: according to Ciano much of his problems with Hitler arose because of his persistence not to speak with him through an interpreter. Ambrosio states that during the meeting of Feltre he remained mute since he did not understood what the Führer said. Alex2006 (talk) 09:12, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::::: Yes Mussolini was an intellectual.  You did not have to have a Berlin PhD to be an intellectual. Indeed, he could not keep up in rapid conversation with Hitler because he refused to use an interpreter. He qualified to teach secondary schools, He read German well enough to translate philosophy, such as Nietzsche, Schopenhauer and Kant. He read very widely in European philosophy, including Marinetti, Herve, Malatesta, and Sorel. [Denis Mack Smith, ''Mussolini'' pp 9-13]  He planned, but never got far, histories of philosophy and Christianity. That's the sort of thing intellectuals actually do.  Nolte [''Three Faces of Fascism'' p 200] says: "His command of contemporary philosophy and political literature was at least as great as that of any other contemporary European political leader." Rjensen (talk) 12:25, 10 September 2015 (UTC):Not secondary school, primary school, "scuola elementare", 6 to 11, bambini, Rjensen, bambini. :-) He was a "maestro" (who, btw, had a lot of problems with the discipline of his pupils :-)). And a poser. A great poser, an actor, an "istrione". He played the intellectual, the superman, but was not one. If for you someone which translates (badly) some pages from German and writes some bad books is an intellectual, well, he was one. But so am I, and you. Sorry, but my concept of intellectual is a bit different: Croce, Gentile, Gramsci, Pasolini, Eco: these are the intellectuals of XX century. Mussolini was a giant politically (until he lost the sense of reality): as intellectual, he was a zero. What Nolte says, if is true, does not go to his favor, but rather to the disfavor of the European politicians of that time. A last advice: if you know Italian, buy or lend De Felice's first volume, and read it. It is a masterpiece. Cheers. Alex2006 (talk) 12:48, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::::sorry, your definition of "intellectual" for the 20th century is ridiculous--Just five of them??? that is not how scholars use the term. They have studied hundreds of Italian intellectuals who went into exile in the 1920s and 1930s, and even larger numbers stayed behind. see ''Journal of Modern Italian Studies'' Volume 15, Issue 5, 2010 for a series of articles on this topic.  If there are only five Italian intellectuals in the 20th century, then Mussolini does not make the cut. Does Enrico Fermi?  see Laura Fermi, ''Illustrious Immigrants: The Intellectual Migration From Europe 1930-41''    Rjensen (talk) 13:25, 10 September 2015 (UTC):::::Five? Of course not, I was just citing a few "heavy weights" among them. :-) Fermi was not an intellectual, was a scientist. His humanistic interests were zero (I forgot to say that here in Italy the word "intellettuale" has a specific humanistic connotation). See below, from the dictionary of the Enciclopedia Italiana:::::::::: About Laura Fermi, I like her books. I own a very scarce first Italian edition of her "Atoms in the family". BTW ,she wrote also a book about the "Duce". :-) Alex2006 (talk) 13:39, 10 September 2015 (UTC)::::::The rest of us here are editing the English language Wikipedia....where people who translate Nietzsche, Schopenhauer and Kant are called intellectuals. Rjensen (talk) 14:14, 10 September 2015 (UTC):::::::We are having a so-called clash of civilizations then...OK, when in Rome, so as the Romans do! Mussolini intellectual then - but not "intellettuale". :-) Alex2006 (talk) 14:26, 10 September 2015 (UTC):Rjensen, in response to your comment above in response to mine, I am not "rejecting" what scholars say about Mussolini founding fascism, nor does what I said depend on my having to present alternative sources. Please read my comments and try to understand what I am actually saying, which is about the broader issue of definition and the inevitable subjectivity of historical interpretation, as well as the issue of presentation and repetition and the fact that there can be more than one way of representing, as an overview, what sources say. We don't have to make this bold statement. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';08:51, 10 September 2015 (UTC):::no. our job at Wiki is to summarize what the RS are saying. your subjectivism sounds like personal POV about how history operates. Rjensen (talk) 12:11, 10 September 2015 (UTC)7::::Indeed, that's exactly what I have said and acknowledged, about three times now. Like I said, you could always read what I said properly, rather than just saying "no" in a somewhat pointless bid to counter to an argument I have never actually made and continuing to accuse me of "subjectivism" and, now, expressing a personal POV. Anyhow, whatever. I was asked to comment on the original inclusion/change and I have. '''User:N-HH|N-HH;/font;''' '''User talk:N-HH|talk;/font;/Special:Contributions/N-HH|edits;/font;''';18:34, 10 September 2015 (UTC)Mussolini as intellectualI reverted the addition about Mussolini as "generally viewed by historians..." etc.. In Italy, no reputable historian (Tasca, de Felice, Gentile, ecc.) sees him as an intellectual. As written above, in Italian academia he is seen as an autodidact, without higher formal education, and a culture typical of the early 20th century lower middle class, later made wider through a lot of chaotic readings. I can bring lot of references about that in some days.Moreover, also the citation of Nolte here is out of place. The fact the Mussolini had a "command of contemporary philosophy and political literature  at least as great as that of any other contemporary European political" does not imply per se that he was an intellectual, but just means that he was at the same level as politicians of that time, which per definition were NOT intellectuals. To complete the reasoning, one should demonstrate that the political class of that time (Hitler, Franco, Chamberlain, Stalin, etc.) was made of intellectuals. We could a) write that "some historians" consider him an intellectual: this would be fair, and b) move the citation of Nolte. Alex2006 (talk) 08:31, 11 September 2015 (UTC)::I fixed it to state that some historians consider him an intellectual, with cites to Bosworth and Nolte. Nolte is a leading German historian, and a specialist on comparative politics in the 1920s and 1930s. His statement is certainly based on vast scholarship and familiarity with the leading figures of the era in all the European countries. I suggest you read Nolte p 200 closely. He says " at least as great as that of any other contemporary European political leader. So it would seem best not to cast doubts on Mussolini's sincerity without good reason, and not to be skeptical in our approach to his self-interpretation." Nolte's interpretation has been endorsed by ‎Arcangelo William Salomone and Anthony James Joes, who both quot it verbatim. Rjensen (talk) 11:22, 11 September 2015 (UTC):::Mamma mia Rjensen, you still don't get the point: maybe I have problem to explain myself. I don't contest at all what Nolte says, but you cannot use his sentence to proof that Mussolini was an intellectual. Nolte does not say that, but just that his cultural level was as high as that of the other leading politicians of the time. But he did not say that those others have been considered intellectuals. That's why I did not suggest to remove the sentence, but only to move it to a more appropriate place. Did you understand my point now? Alex2006 (talk) 11:36, 11 September 2015 (UTC)::::The purpose of this section on "Propaganda and cult of personality" is to establish Mussolini's intellectual interests and background. Nolte speaks to that. I think it's reasonably true that for full-time politicians, they did their studying, wide reading, and intellectual work before they entered full-time politics. Rjensen (talk) 11:53, 11 September 2015 (UTC)HistoriographyMultiple approaches to Mussolini -- the scholarship is well covered  in ''Mussolini in the First World War'' by Paul O'Brien -- with the introduction .  He comments on the major biographies in Italian ; English.  Rjensen (talk) 15:19, 11 September 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 3 external links on Benito Mussolini. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20080415145038/to *Added archive toWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;06:55, 25 January 2016 (UTC)