;;Why ??I added the pictures  of hime being awarded at the Asian Film Awards and an screenshot from one of his recent movies . . Both the images enhance the encyclopaedic information on this article . Why was it removed ? —Preceding unsigned comment added by Bineetojha (talk • Special:Contributions/Bineetojha|contribs) 07:53, November 21, 2011‎ (UTC);;;Anti-Sikh RiotsI see that the links/description added by me has been removed again.At the outset I would like to mention that the purpose of the content is not to malign but to bring forth to the general public facts which ascribe to the life of Mr. Bachchan. He is on record clarifying his position on the matter said and the information is a very important fact of his personal life.(I believe hiding this fact from the general public, ostensibly due to the information "not being new" is not the good thing. His alleged involvement in a matter as serious as instigation of riots deserves mention on his public profile and if subsequently exonerated, can also be mentioned.The general public needs to be informed of all aspects pertaining to Mr Bachchans life. Not just those which sing paeans about his stature.This is a user contributed and moderated community and needs the support of all members..Please find the original text I had published as follows 2013:Amitabh Bachchan was in the news in 2011 for the wrong reason. He was accused by certain members of the Sikh community of instigating attacks on Sikhs during the 1984 anti-Sikh riots. The attacks followed the assassination of Indira Gandhi post Operation Blue Star.He is alleged to have made polemic remarks saying “Khoon ka Badla Khoon se lenge” ( “Blood for Blood”)   . Several eyewitness have claimed that he made such remarks  and wrote to the Akal Takht asking for action against Mr. Bachchan.Responding to the allegations, Mr Bachchan is said to have written to the Akal Takht  , which is the highest temporal body of the Sikhs, pleading his innocence. The Akal Takht has not taken a decision yet exonerating Mr Bachchan of the charges.Following the controversy, few members of the Sikh community protested by chanting slogans against Mr Bachchan as he carried the Olympic torch  during the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.ReferencesSemi-protected edit request on 7 February 2016;;;;;;amitabh bachan super star indian cinemasSpecial:Contributions/39.45.123.128|39.45.123.128 (talk) 10:52, 7 February 2016 (UTC):File:Red information icon with gradient background.svg|20px|link= '''Not done:''';; as you have not requested a specific change in the form "Please replace XXX with YYY" or "Please add ZZZ between PPP and QQQ".More importantly, you have not cited reliable sources to back up your request, without which no information should be added to, or changed in, any article. - Arjayay (talk) 13:15, 7 February 2016 (UTC)