JapanAinu Geneticshttps://ajw.asahi.com/article/behind_news/social_affairs/AJ201211010059:Thanks. We should stick with the academic sources. We can't use the pdf at the jspsusa forum, nor Watkins page, and news sources are never as good as the original papers they report but they often lead to the sources we need. Dougweller (talk) 09:45, 23 February 2014 (UTC)sources on Ainu historyAinu wars against JapanKoshamain revoltShakushain's RevoltMenashi-Kunashir RebellionOtherModern historyftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/012/i0370e/i0370e08.pdfRajmaan (talk) 06:54, 23 February 2014 (UTC)Ainu Australoid?Hello, this section is a response to Sturmgewehr88's request. I didn't find an authoritative source for the claim that the Ainu are genetically Australoid. According to one study, the Ainu, despite miscegenation, don't cluster as closely with ancestral Northeast Asians as the latter do with one another. By the way, notice that the title of the category says "type," not race, and the Ainu do exhibit a rather Australoid morphology. User:Everything Is Numbers|'''EIN''';/font; (User talk:Everything Is Numbers|talk;/font;) 14:38, 25 March 2014 (UTC):The sources you provided only proved that the Ainu are distinct from other peoples, which is already a given fact, and nothing more. I agree that the Ainu are awkwardly placed, but you can't just infer that they're "Austroloid-type". '''User:Sturmgewehr88|ミーラー強斗武''' (talk) 18:22, 25 March 2014 (UTC)right|200px|Haplogroup C migration::Yes. I'll leave this to someone who ''may'' find indications for it in the future. But just to be clear, even though this would probably qualify as improper synthesis, it can be inferred by omission that the Ainu are Australoid from the premise that each of the presently existing humans can be categorized under at least one of the four macro-races. It's the most common hypothesis today that the Ainu originated from a merger of the Okhotsk and Satsumon people, who inhabited the Japanese Archipelago before the Yamato and could have been part Australoid for all we know. It makes sense that the Ainu are Australoid if, considering the genetic and archaeological clues, it's true that before the Mongoloids and Caucasoids came, the Australoids occupied a much wider area than just Australia and Melanesia - from Africa via the Arabian Peninsula, an area spanning as far westward as the Indian subcontinent, as far northward as the The Japanese Archipelago or farther, and maybe even as far eastward as the Americas (see Pericúes and Fuegians). Also see Haplogroup C-M130. User:Everything Is Numbers|'''EIN''';/font; (User talk:Everything Is Numbers|talk;/font;) 11:52, 3 April 2014 (UTC):::Ok, well if you find a few sources that support this, then you can re-add the category (or find a better one) and add the information to the article. '''User:Sturmgewehr88|ミーラー強斗武''' (talk) 13:57, 3 April 2014 (UTC)Ainu in TokyoIn March 2014, [a new volume] was published looking at the Ainu community in Tokyo, which may be worth drawing from in terms of fleshing out the section here dealing with this sub-set of the Ainu diaspora beyond Hokkaido. However, I wasn't sure how best to draw from this source in order to further inform the article. Has anyone else here taken a look at this volume yet, to see what kind of information might be worth referencing? --Nerroth (talk) 16:16, 4 May 2014 (UTC)Questionable magazine quotation misleadingly attributed to a reprint in a source that doesn't ADMIT to being bad at fact-checking...I removed" ," '' Japan Today'', March 1, 2009.;/blockquote;as a source for the claimIn a 2009 news story, ''Japan Today'' reported, "Many Ainu were forced t o work, essentially as slaves, for Wajin (ethnic Japanese), resulting i n the breakup of families and the introduct ion of smallpox, measles, cholera and tuberculosis into their community. In 1869, the new Meiji government renamed Ez o as Hokkaido and unilaterally incorporate d it into Japan. It banned the Ainu languag e, took Ainu land away, and prohibited sal mon fishing and deer hunting.";/blockquote;Let alone the fact that, per the source cited , it is not a 2009 news story reported by ''Ja pan Today'' but rather "originally appeared in Metropolis magazine", but ... how can ''J apan Today'' be considered a reliable news source (much less a source for difficult sch olarly/historical issues) when they have bo rrowed  stories wholesale from ''Metropolis'', a popular free magazine whose publisher, according to [its own websit e], ''makes no representations about the accuracy of the information, data, advertise ments, graphics, or other content contained in any Japan Partnership website, e-mail newsletter, or print publication, including but not limited to the Japan Partnership prin t and online magazine, blogs, and other e mail newsletters, and any other media cha nnel owned or produced by Japan Partners hip''? The story in question is attributed to Andy Sharp  a decent reporter for Bloomberg, but unless he's a renowned scholar of Ainu studies (and per WP:BURDEN we must assume he isn't) then material he writes for ''Metropolis'' must be taken as his opinion and his opinion only. Hijiri 88 (User talk:Hijiri88|聖Special:Contributions/Hijiri88|やや;) 09:40, 15 January 2015 (UTC)Trouble archiving links on the articleHello.  I am finding myself repeatedly archiving links on this page.  This usually happens when the archive doesn't recognize the archive to be good.This could be because the link is either a redirect, or I am unknowingly archiving a dead link.  Please check the following links to see if it's redirecting, or in anyway bad, and fix them, if possible.* * In any event this will be the only notification in regards to these links, and I will discontinue my attempts to archive these pages.Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:08, 13 July 2015 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 5 external links on Ainu people. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archive https://web.archive.org/20130710182919/to *Added archive to *Added archive *Added archiveCheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;19:08, 13 July 2015 (UTC)Removal of dataThere was a huge removal of missing data by Krakkos so I reverted it back to it's normal state.If there is any mistakes on the page than it should be removed immediately but I see not one problem since they are all sourced properly.;/s;:It's the responsibility of an editor restoring sock puppet edits to ensure they are satisfactory. That includes checking the sources, which I doubt this editor did. One obvious sock has already been blocked for restoring material by another  WorldCreatorFighter sock puppet. User:Doug Weller|Doug Weller talk 21:57, 2 January 2016 (UTC)External links modifiedHello fellow Wikipedians,I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Ainu people. Please take a moment to review . If necessary, add cbignore after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you can add  to keep me off the page altogether. I made the following changes:*Added archive to *Added archiveWhen you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the ''checked'' parameter below to '''true''' to let others know.For the first link:For the second link:Cheers.—User:Cyberbot II|cyberbot IIUser talk:Cyberbot II|Talk to my owner:Online;07:05, 27 February 2016 (UTC)