Algorithms and their Big O performanceI'd like to put in some mention of computer algorithms and their Big O performance: selection sort being N^2, merge sort N log N, travelling salesman, and so on, and implications for computing (faster computers don't compensate for big-O differences, etc).  Think this should be part of this write-up, or separate but linked?:''I think separate would be better, to increase the article count :-). Then you can have links from the Complexity, Computation and Computer Science pages. Maybe you can call it "Algorithm run times" or something like that.'' --AxelBoldt:''Or something like'' analysis of algorithms ''or'' Algorithmic Efficiency ''since you may sometimes choose based on other factors as well. --loh'':''I'd recommend puting it under computational complexity which earlier I made into a redirect to complexity theory.  It should be a page of it's own, but I didn't want to write it ;-)  --BlckKnght''Removed polylogarithmicReinstated my VERY bad. Missed a bracket"Tight" bounds?The article refers to terms "tight" and "tighter", but these terms are never defined! Alas, other pages (e.g. "bin packing") refer to this page as the one giving a formal definition of this term; moreover, "Asymptotically tight bound" redirects here. Yes, the term is intuitively clear, but a math-related page should have clear definitions.I think a short section giving a formal definition of the term "tight bound" and referring to Theta-notation is needed (e.g. as a subsection of section "8. Related asymptotic notations"), and once such a section is created the redirection from "Asymptotically tight bound" should link directly there."big O" or "Big O"?This article is not consistent wrt. "big O" vs "Big O" (case). What should it be? --Mortense (talk) 10:04, 5 February 2016 (UTC): Yes, I didn't notice. In my opinion, "big" is just a regular adjective here, that should take a lower case b, except of course at the beginning of a sentence. The upper case B (mostly at the end of the article) should I think be all replaced by lower case b. Sapphorain (talk) 10:28, 5 February 2016 (UTC):: Agreed, "big O" is appropriate except beginning a sentence. - CRGreathouse (t | Special:Contributions/CRGreathouse|c);17:55, 5 February 2016 (UTC)::: … Done (I hope). Sapphorain (talk) 20:01, 6 February 2016 (UTC)