Comments always welcome. Editing is not since Visions of Truth is my own work.;/font;Then it probably doesn't belong in Wikipedia... Much like your fonts which wreak havoc in a number of people's browsers.sjcPS: keep on hopping... sjcWhat belongs and what doesn't belong... are people who are too into themselves and enjoy putting others down who are different. IF everyone was like sjc, you'd need to find another axe to grind or another axel to bolt. Keep stabbing, perhaps the knife will slip. If you are so petty that a color bothers you and your wiki 'pals', then you don't need to visit those pages, do you ? Stay away... far far away.;/font;You can have the baton.  -- ZoeThanks ! BF;/font;----Welcome back. I'm glad you got your password problem sorted out. Yes, I did work on New Age after you left for a while, but then I got distracted. ;-) -- Stephen Gilbert 18:37 Dec 13, 2002 (UTC)----Thanks for the definition of intuition. --Jeff 21:38 Dec 16, 2002 (UTC)BF, once an article is deleted, its archive goes with it.  But you can ask an administrator to restore it, if you think it needs to be.  -- ZoeIf all you want is a log of the deletion go to Wikipedia:Deletion log. If you need logs previous to December visit Wikipedia talk:Deletion log. --mavWith the amount of deleted articles, it might be helpful to check titles and possibly redo them right or some related spinoff. Thanks Zoe and mav.In most cases, deleted articles don't have any archives worth keeping.  -- Zoe----Sorry to jump in but I saw your poetry query on Deb's page. If that is Welsh, I am the Mayor of Maastricht! It will simply be an older form of English. English-only speakers and readers cannot understand Welsh _at_all_! (Unless they happen to use a modern loanword from English like carpark (spelt differently!) or an old loanword like eglwys = Fr eglise = Latin ecclesias = Eng church! Have a quick look at and follow the "Cymraeg" links! hth, Nevilley 00:57 Feb 8, 2003 (UTC):Thanks, Nevilley, you got in before me.  It sounded like an extract from Chaucer - was it?  BF, You are probably getting confused about what Welsh is by analogy with "Scots" - which is just a dialect of English, whilst Welsh is a language in its own right. Deb 12:41 Feb 8, 2003 (UTC)