File:Ängsälvor - Nils Blommér 1850.jpg|thumb|right|300px|''Meadow Elves'', by Nils Blommér, 1850'''Alfheim''' (, "Land Of The Fairies"), also called '''Ljosalfheim''' (''Ljósálf[a]heimr'', "Ljósálfar|light-elf home"), is one of the Nine Worlds and home of the Light Elves in Norse mythology.In Old Norse textsÁlfheim as an abode of the Fairies is mentioned only twice in Old Norse texts.The eddic poem ''Grímnismál'' describes twelve divine dwellings beginning in stanza5 with:Ýdalir call theythe place where Ull;brA hall for himself hath set;;brAnd Álfheim the godsto Frey once gave;brAs a tooth-gift in ancient times.;/blockquote;A tooth-gift was a gift given to an infant on the cutting of the first tooth.In the 12th century eddic prose ''Gylfaginning'', Snorri Sturluson relates it as the first of a series of abodes in heaven:That which is called Álfheim is one, where dwell the peoples called ''ljósálfar'' [Light Elves]; but the ''dökkálfar'' [Dark Elves] dwell down in the earth, and they are unlike in appearance, but by far more unlike in nature. The Light-elves are fairer to look upon than the sun, but the Dark-elves are blacker than pitch.;/blockquote;The account later, in speaking of a hall in the Highest Heaven called Gimlé that shall survive when heaven and earth have died, explains:It is said that another heaven is to the southward and upward of this one, and it is called Andlang [''Andlangr'' 'Endlong'] but the third heaven is yet above that, and it is called Vídbláin [''Vídbláinn'' 'Wide-blue'] and in that heaven we think this abode is. But we believe that none but Light-Elves inhabit these mansions now.;/blockquote;It is not indicated whether these heavens are identical to Álfheim or distinct. Some texts read Vindbláin (''Vindbláinn'' 'Wind-blue') instead of Vídbláin.Modern commentators speculate (or sometimes state as fact) that Álfheim was one of the nine worlds (''heima'') mentioned in stanza2 of the eddic poem ''Völuspá''.Popular culture* J. R. R. Tolkien anglicized ''Álfheim'' as ''Elvenhome'', or ''Eldamar'' in the speech of the Elves. In his stories, Eldamar lies in a coastal region of the Undying Lands in the Uttermost West. The High King of the Elves in the West was Ingwë, an echo of the name Yngvi often found as a name for Frey, whose abode was in ''Álfheim'' according to the ''Grímnismál''.* In a Japanese light novel and anime series Sword Art Online'', the setting for the second and fourth arc is based on Álfheimr.* In a Japanese game called ''Bayonetta'', there are angelic portals called Alfheim where the player travels to do specific angel slaying for broken witch hearts or moon pearls to increase vitality or witch power. It does not involve elves, however. Only its name is based on Norse mythology.See also* FairylandReferences*''Wikisource:Prose Edda/Gylfaginning (The Fooling Of Gylfe)'' by Sturluson, Snorri, 13th century Edda, in English. Accessed Apr. 16, 2007*''Gylfaginning'' in Old Norse[Gylfaginning XI-XX]*Robbins, Rossell Hope (1959). ''The Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology.'' New York: Crown Publishers, Inc.*Bulfinch, Thomas (1834). ''Bulfinch's Mythology.'' New York: Harper ; Row, 1970, p.348. ISBN 0-690-57260-3.*Marshall Jones Company (1930). ''The Mythology of All Races'' Series, Volume 2 ''Eddic'', Great Britain: Marshall Jones Company, 1930, pp.220–221.Sources