'''Ælfheah''' (, "elf-high"; c. 953– 19 April 1012), officially remembered as  '''Saint Alphege''' within some churches,OBD160CathOnland also called '''Elphege''', '''Alfege''',Rumble "From Winchester to Canterbury" ''Leaders of the Anglo-Saxon Church'' p. 173 or '''Godwine''',Rumble165was an Anglo-Saxon Bishop of Winchester, later Archbishop of Canterbury.  He became an anchorite before being elected abbot of Bath Abbey. His perceived piety and sanctity led to his promotion to the episcopate, and eventually, to his becoming archbishop. Ælfheah furthered the cult of Dunstan and also encouraged learning.  He was captured by Viking raiders in 1011 and killed by them the following year after refusing to allow himself to be ransomed.  Ælfheah was canonised as a saint in 1078.  Thomas Becket, a later Archbishop of Canterbury, prayed to him just before his own murder in Canterbury Cathedral.LifePurportedly born in Weston on the outskirts of Bath, Accessed 14 August 2009 Ælfheah became a monk early in life.KnowlesHis birth took place around 953.Rumble "From Winchester to Canterbury" ''Leaders of the Anglo-Saxon Church'' p. 165 He first entered the monastery of Deerhurst, but then moved to Bath, where he became an anchorite. He was noted for his piety and austerity, and rose to become abbot of Bath Abbey. The 12th century chronicler William of Malmesbury recorded that Ælfheah was a monk and prior at Glastonbury Abbey,Rumble "From Winchester to Canterbury" ''Leaders of the Anglo-Saxon Church'' p. 166 but this is not accepted by all historians.KnowlesIndications are that Ælfheah became abbot at Bath by 982, perhaps as early as around 977. He perhaps shared authority with his predecessor Æscwig after 968.Rumble166Probably due to the influence of Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury (959–988), Ælfheah was elected Bishop of Winchester in 984,Barlow ''English Church 1000–1066'' p. 109 footnote 5 and was consecrated on 19October that year.DNBWhile bishop he was largely responsible for the construction of a large organ in the cathedral, audible from over a mile (1600m) away and said to require more than 24men to operate. He also built and enlarged the city's churches,Hindley ''A Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons'' pp. 304–305 and promoted the cult of Swithun and his own predecessor, Æthelwold of Winchester.DNBOne act promoting Æthelwold's cult was the translation of Æthelwold's body to a new tomb in the cathedral at Winchester, which Ælfheah presided over on 10 September 996.Rumble "From Winchester to Canterbury" ''Leaders of the Anglo-Saxon Church'' p. 167Following a Viking raid in 994, a peace treaty was agreed with one of the raiders, Olaf Tryggvason. Besides receiving danegeld, Olaf converted to Christianity and undertook never to raid or fight the English again.Williams ''Æthelred the Unready'' p. 47 Ælfheah may have played a part in the treaty negotiations, and it is certain that he confirmed Olaf in his new faith.Leyser "Ælfheah" ''Oxford Dictionary of National Biography''In 1006 Ælfheah succeeded Ælfric of Abingdon|Ælfric as Archbishop of Canterbury, taking Swithun's head with him as a relic for the new location.DNBHe went to Rome in 1007 to receive his pallium—symbol of his status as an archbishop—from Pope John XVIII, but was robbed during his journey.Barlow ''English Church 1000–1066'' pp. 298–299 footnote 7 While at Canterbury he promoted the cult of Dunstan,DNBordering the writing of the second ''Life of Dunstan'', which Adelard of Ghent composed between 1006 and 1011.Barlow ''English Church 1000–1066'' p. 62 He also introduced new practices into the liturgy, and was instrumental in the Witenagemot's recognition of Wulfsige of Sherborne as a saint in about 1012.Barlow ''English Church 1000–1066'' p. 223Ælfheah sent Ælfric of Eynsham to Cerne Abbey to take charge of its monastic school. He was present at the council of May 1008 at which Wulfstan II, Archbishop of York, preached his ''Sermo Lupi ad Anglos'' (''The Sermon of the Wolf to the English''), castigating the English for their moral failings and blaming the latter for the tribulations afflicting the country.In 1011 the Danes again raided England, and from 8–29 September they laid siege to Canterbury. Aided by the treachery of Ælfmaer, whose life Ælfheah had once saved, the raiders succeeded in sacking the city.Williams ''Æthelred the Unready'' pp. 106–107 Ælfheah was taken prisoner and held captive for seven months. Godwine (Bishop of Rochester), Leofrun (abbess of St Mildrith's), and the king's reeve, Ælfweard were captured also, but the abbot of St Augustine's Abbey, Ælfmaer, managed to escape.Williams106Canterbury Cathedral was plundered and burned by the Danes following Ælfheah's capture.Barlow ''English Church 1000–1066'' pp. 209–210DeathÆlfheah refused to allow a ransom to be paid for his freedom, and as a result was killed on 19April 1012 at GreenwichHindley301(then in Kent, now part of London), reputedly on the site of St Alfege's Church.SaintsHandbook214The account of Ælfheah's death appears in the E version of the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'':Ælfheah was the first Archbishop of Canterbury to die a violent death. A contemporary report tells that Thorkell the Tall attempted to save Ælfheah from the mob about to kill him by offering them everything he owned except for his ship, in exchange for Ælfheah's life; Thorkell's presence is not mentioned in the ''Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'', however.Williams ''Æthelred the Unready'' pp. 109–110 Some sources record that the final blow, with the back of an axe, was delivered as an Coup de grâce|act of kindness by a Christian convert known as "Thrum." Ælfheah was buried in St Paul's Cathedral.DNBIn 1023 his body was moved by King Cnut to Canterbury, with great ceremony.Hindley ''Brief History of the Anglo-Saxons'' pp. 309–310 Thorkell the Tall was appalled at the brutality of his fellow raiders, and switched sides to the English king Æthelred the Unready following Ælfheah's death.VenerationPope Gregory VII canonised Ælfheah in 1078, with a feast day of 19April.Delaney ''Dictionary of Saints'' pp. 29–30 Lanfranc, the first post-Conquest archbishop, was dubious about some of the saints venerated at Canterbury. He was persuaded of Ælfheah's sanctity, but Ælfheah and Augustine of Canterbury were the only pre-conquest Anglo-Saxon archbishops kept on Canterbury's calendar of saints. Ælfheah's shrine, which had become neglected, was rebuilt and expanded in the early 12th century under Anselm of Canterbury, who was instrumental in retaining Ælfheah's name in the church calendar.Southern "St Anselm and his English Pupils" ''Mediaeval and Renaissance Studies'' After the 1174 fire in Canterbury Cathedral, Ælfheah's remains together with those of Dunstan were placed around the high altar, at which Thomas Becket is said to have commended his life into Ælfheah's care shortly before his martyrdom during the Becket controversy.DNBThe new shrine was sealed in lead, and was north of the high altar, sharing the honour with Dunstan's shrine, which was located south of the high altar.Nilson ''Cathedral Shrines'' pp. 66–67 A ''Life of Saint Ælfheah'' in prose and verse was written by a Canterbury monk named Osbern, at Lanfranc's request. The prose version has survived, but the ''Life'' is very much a hagiography: many of the stories it contains have obvious Biblical parallels, making them suspect as a historical record.DNBIn the late medieval period, Ælfheah's feast day was celebrated in Scandinavia, perhaps because of the saint's connection with Cnut.Blair "Handlist of Anglo-Saxon Saints" ''Local Saints and Local Churches'' p. 504 Few church dedications to him are known, with most of them occurring in Kent and one each in London and Winchester;Rumble173as well as St Alfege's Church in Greenwich, a nearby hospital (1931-1968) was named after him. In 1929 a new church in Bath was dedicated to Ælfheah, under the name Alphege, designed by Giles Gilbert Scott in homage to the ancient Roman church of Santa Maria in Cosmedin. Accessed 30 August 2009Notes60emCitations40emReferences******************Further reading*External links*ca